The Project Gutenberg EBook of The American Horsewoman, by Elizabeth Karr

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The American Horsewoman

Author: Elizabeth Karr

Release Date: September 6, 2012 [EBook #40684]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMERICAN HORSEWOMAN ***




Produced by Julia Miller, Jennifer Linklater and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









  THE
  AMERICAN HORSEWOMAN

  BY
  MRS. ELIZABETH KARR

  "Gold that buys health can never be ill spent,
  Nor hours laid out in harmless merriment."
                                     J. WEBSTER

  [Illustration]

  BOSTON
  HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY
  New York: 11 East Seventeenth Street
  The Riverside Press, Cambridge
  1884


  Copyright, 1884,
  BY ELIZABETH KARR.

  _All rights reserved._

  _The Riverside Press, Cambridge_:
  Electrotyped and Printed by H. O. Houghton & Co.




PREFACE.


In presenting this volume to the women of America, the author would
remark that, at least as far as she is aware, it is the first one,
exclusively devoted to the instruction of lady riders, that has ever
been written by one of their own countrywomen. In its preparation, no
pretension is made to the style of a practiced author, the writer freely
acknowledging it to be her first venture in the (to her) hitherto
unexplored regions of authorship; she has simply undertaken,--being
guided and aided by her own experience in horseback riding,--to write,
in plain and comprehensive language, and in as concise a manner as is
compatible with a clear understanding of her subject, all that she deems
it essential for a horsewoman to know. This she has endeavored to do
without any affectation or effort to acquire reputation as an author,
and wholly for the purpose of benefiting those of her own sex who wish
to learn not only to ride, but to ride well. She has also been induced
to prepare the work by the urgent solicitations of many lady friends,
who, desirous of having thorough information on horseback riding, were
unable to find in any single work those instructions which they needed.

Many valuable works relating to the subject could be had, but none
especially for ladies. True, in many of these works prepared for
equestrians a few pages of remarks or advice to horsewomen could be
found, but so scant and limited were they that but little useful and
practical information could be gleaned from them. The writers of these
works never even dreamed of treating many very important points highly
essential to the horsewoman; and, indeed, it could hardly be expected
that they would, as it is almost impossible for any horseman to know,
much less to comprehend, these points. The position of a man in the
saddle is natural and easy, while that of a woman is artificial,
one-sided, and less readily acquired; that which he can accomplish with
facility is for her impossible or extremely difficult, as her position
lessens her command over the horse, and obliges her to depend almost
entirely upon her skill and address for the means of controlling him.

If a gentleman will place himself upon the side-saddle and for a short
time ride the several gaits of his horse, he will have many points
presented which he had not anticipated, and which may puzzle him; that
which appeared simple and easy when in his natural position will become
difficult of performance when he assumes the rôle of a horsewoman. A
trial of this kind will demonstrate to him that the rules applicable to
the one will not invariably be adapted to the other. The reader need not
be surprised, therefore, if in the perusal of this volume she discovers
in certain instances instructions laid down which differ from those met
with in the popular works upon this subject by male authors.

Another inducement to prepare this volume existed in the fact that the
ladies throughout the country, and especially in our large cities and
towns, are apparently awakening to an appreciation of the importance of
out-door amusement and exercise in securing and prolonging health,
strength, beauty, and symmetry of form, and that horseback riding is
rapidly becoming the favorite form of such exercise. Instructions
relating to riding have become, therefore, imperative, in order to
supply a need long felt by those horsewomen who, when in the saddle, are
desirous of acquitting themselves with credit, but who have heretofore
been unable to gain that information which would enable them to ride
with ease and grace, and to manage their steeds with dexterity and
confidence. The author--who has had several years' experience in
horseback riding with the old-fashioned, two-pommeled saddle, and, in
later years, with the English saddle, besides having had the benefit of
the best continental teaching--believes she will be accused of neither
vanity nor egotism when she states that within the pages of this work
instructions will be found amply sufficient to enable any lady who
attends to them to ride with artistic correctness.

Great care has been taken to enter upon and elucidate all those minute
but important details which are so essential, but which, because they
are so simple, are usually passed over without notice or explanation.
Especial attention has also been given to the errors of inexperienced
and uneducated riders, as well as to the mistakes into which beginners
are apt to fall from incorrect modes of teaching, or from no instruction
at all; these errors have been carefully pointed out, and the methods
for correcting them explained. A constant effort has been made to have
these practical hints and valuable explanations as lucid as possible,
that they may readily be comprehended and put into practical use by the
reader.

From the fact that considerable gossip, including some truth, as to
illiteracy, rudeness, offensive familiarity, and scandal of various
kinds has in past years been associated with some of the riding-schools
established in our cities, many ladies entertain a decided antipathy to
all riding-schools; to these ladies, as well as to those who are living
in places where no riding-schools exist, the author feels confident that
this work will prove of great practical utility. Yet she must remark
that, in her opinion, it is neither just nor right to ostracize
indiscriminately all such schools, simply because some of them have
proven blameworthy; whenever a riding-school of good standing is
established and is conducted by a well-known, competent, and gentlemanly
teacher, with one or more skilled lady assistants, she would advise the
ladies of the neighborhood to avail themselves of such opportunity to
become sooner thorough and efficient horsewomen by pursuing the
instructions given in this work under such qualified teachers.

                                                      ELIZABETH KARR.

  NORTH BEND, OHIO.




A BRIEF SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTION.
                                                                  PAGE

 Utility, health, and enjoyment, in horseback riding.--Affection
  of the horse for a kind mistress.--Incorrect views entertained
  by ladies relative to horses and horseback riding.--Tight
  lacing incompatible with correct riding.--Advantages of
  good riding-schools.--Instinct not a sufficient
  guide.--Compatibility of refinement and horseback
  riding.--Importance of out-of-door exercise.                       1


CHAPTER I.

THE HORSE.

 Origin and countries of the horse.--Earliest Scriptural mention
  of the horse.--Caligula's horse.--Horseback riding in the
  Middle Ages.--The Arab horse and his descendants.--Selection
  of a horse, and points to be observed.--Suitable gaits for the
  several conformations of riders.--The fast or running
  walk.--Various kinds of trotting.--The jog trot
  undesirable.--Temperament of the horse to be taken into
  consideration.--Thorough-bred horses.--Low-bred
  horses.--Traits of thorough and low bred horses.--Purchasing a
  horse; when to pay for the purchase.--Kindness to the horse
  instead of brutality.--Advantages of kind treatment of the
  horse.--Horses properly trained from early colt-life, the
  best.--Certain requirements in training a horse for a
  lady.--Ladies should visit their horses in the stable.--Ladies
  of refinement, occupying the highest positions in the
  civilized and fashionable world, personally attend to their
  horses.--Nature of the horse.--Unreliable grooms; their
  vicious course with horses intrusted to their care.--Care
  required in riding livery-stable horses.                          13


CHAPTER II.

THE RIDING HABIT.

 Riding habit should not be gaudy.--Instructions concerning the
  material for riding habit, and how this should be made.--The
  waist.--The basque or jacket.--Length of riding habit.--White
  material not to be worn on horseback.--Riding shirt.--Riding
  drawers.--Riding boots.--Riding corset.--Riding coiffure or
  head-dress.--Riding hat.--Minutiæ to be attended to in the
  riding costume.--How to hold the riding skirt while
  standing.--Riding whip.                                           52


CHAPTER III.

THE SADDLE AND BRIDLE.

 Saddle of ancient times, and the manner of
  riding.--Planchette.--Catherine de Medici deviser of the
  two-pommeled saddle.--M. Pellier, Sr., inventor of the third
  pommel.--English saddle.--Advantages of the third
  pommel.--Saddle should, invariably, be made and fitted to the
  horse.--Seat of saddle.--Kinds of saddles for different
  ladies.--Proper application of the third pommel.--Saddle
  recommended and used by the author.--Points to be attended to
  in procuring a saddle.--Girths.--New mode of tightening
  girths.--Stirrups and stirrup-leathers.--Safety
  stirrups.--How to attach the stirrup-leather.--The bridle and
  reins.--Martingales.--Snaffle-bits.--Curb-bits.--Curb-chain.--Tricks
  of horses with bits, and their remedy.--Adjustment of the
  bit and head-stall.--Care of the bit.--How to correctly place
  the saddle on the horse.--Remarks concerning girthing the
  horse.--Great advantages derived from knowing how to saddle
  and bridle one's horse.                                           67


CHAPTER IV.

MOUNTING AND DISMOUNTING.

 Timidity in presence of a horse should be overcome.--First
  attempts at mounting.--Mounting from a horse-block.--Mounting
  from the ground.--Mounting with assistance from a gentleman;
  how this is effected.--What the gentleman must do.--A restive
  horse while mounting; how to be managed.--Attractiveness of
  correct mounting.--To dismount with assistance from a
  gentleman; what the gentleman must do.--Attentions to the
  skirt both while mounting and dismounting.--Dismounting
  without aid; upon the ground; upon a very low
  horse-block.--Concluding remarks.                                 99


CHAPTER V.

THE SEAT ON HORSEBACK.

 The absolute necessity for a correct seat.--Natural riders
  rarely acquire a correct seat.--The dead-weight seat.--The
  wabbling seat.--Essential to good and graceful riding that
  the body be held square and erect.--The correct seat.--Proper
  attitude for the body, shoulders, waist, arms, hands, knees,
  and legs, when on horseback.--Uses and advantages of the
  third pommel.--Lessons in position should always be taken by
  the novice in horseback riding.--Faulty positions of ladies
  called "excellent equestriennes," pointed out at an imaginary
  park.--Remarks concerning the improper use of stirrups and
  pommels.--Pupils and teachers frequently in erroneous
  positions toward each other.--Obstinacy of some pupils, and
  wrong ideas of others.--Ladies should not be in too much
  haste to become riders before they understand all the
  elementary and necessary requirements; but should advance
  carefully, attentively, and thoroughly.--Suggestions to
  teachers of ladies in equitation.                                114


CHAPTER VI.

HOLDING THE REINS, AND MANAGING THE HORSE.

 A thorough knowledge of the management of the horse highly
  necessary for a lady.--Position in the saddle has an
  important influence.--Horses generally more gentle with women
  than with men.--Position should be acquired first, and
  afterwards the reins be used.--How to hold the hands and
  snaffle-reins, in first lessons.--To turn the horse to the
  right, to the left, to back him, to stop him, with a
  snaffle-rein in each hand.--Manner of holding the
  snaffle-reins in the bridle-hand; to turn the horse to either
  side; to back, and to stop him.--To change the snaffle-reins
  from the left to the right hand; to reinstate them in the
  bridle-hand.--To separate the snaffle-reins; to shorten or
  lengthen them.--To hold the curb and bridoon, or double
  bridle-reins; to shorten or lengthen them; to shorten the
  curb and lengthen the snaffle-reins; to shorten the snaffle
  and lengthen the curb-reins.--To tighten a rein that has
  become loose.--To change the double bridle from the left to
  the right hand; to return it to the left hand.--Management of
  reins when making quick turns.--European manner of holding
  the double bridle-reins, a pair in each hand.--The
  equestrienne should practice and perfect herself in these
  various manoeuvrings with the reins.--The proper rein-hold
  creates a correspondence between the rider's hand and the
  horse's mouth, and gives support to the animal.--Give and
  take movements--The dead-pull.--In collecting the horse the
  curb must be used.--The secret of good riding.--The
  management of the reins with restive horses.--Liberty of the
  reins sometimes necessary.--Movements of horse and rider
  should correspond.--Horse united or collected.--Horse
  disunited.--To animate the horse.--To soothe the horse.--What
  to do in certain improper movements of the horse.--Concluding
  remarks.                                                         145


CHAPTER VII.

THE WALK.

 The movements of the horse in walking.--A good walk is a
  certain basis for perfection in other gaits.--A lady's horse
  should be especially trained to walk well.--Every change
  in the walk, as turning, backing, and stopping, should be well
  learned, before attempting to ride in a faster gait.--The walk
  is a gait more especially desirable for some ladies.--The advance,
  the turn, the stop, the reining back, in the walk.--Remarks on
  the reining back.                                                181


CHAPTER VIII.

THE TROT, THE AMBLE, THE PACE, THE RACK.

 The movements of the horse in trotting.--The trot a safe gait
  for a lady.--The jog trot.--The racing trot.--The true
  trot.--The French trot.--The English trot; is desirable for
  ladies to learn.--Objections to the French trot.--How to
  manage the horse and ride the English trot.--Which is the
  leading foot of the horse in the trot.--To stop a horse in
  the English trot.--Trotting in a circle.--Circling to the
  right, to the left.--The amble.--The pace.--The rack.            197


CHAPTER IX.

THE CANTER.

 Leading with the right foot, with the left foot.--The rapid
  gallop.--The canter.--The true canter.--To commence the
  canter; position of the rider, and management of the
  horse.--To canter with the right leg leading.--To canter with
  the left leg leading.--To determine with which leg the horse
  is leading in the canter.--To change from the trot to the
  canter.--To turn in the canter, to the right, to the
  left.--Management of the horse while making a turn in the
  canter.--To stop in the canter.--Remarks concerning position
  in the canter.                                                   221


CHAPTER X.

THE HAND GALLOP, THE FLYING GALLOP.

 The hand gallop, a favorite gait with ladies.--Position and
  management of the reins, in the hand gallop.--Cautions to
  ladies when riding the hand gallop.--To manage a disobedient
  horse during the hand gallop.--Turning when riding the hand
  gallop.--Position of rider while turning in the hand
  gallop.--The flying gallop an exercise for country
  roads.--Cautions to ladies previous to riding the flying
  gallop.--Holding the reins, position of the rider, and
  management of the horse, in the flying gallop.--To stop in
  the flying gallop.--Concluding remarks.                          238


CHAPTER XI.

THE LEAP, THE STANDING LEAP, THE FLYING LEAP.

 Advantages of learning to leap.--Requisites necessary in
  leaping.--The standing leap.--Position of the rider,
  rein-hold, and management of the horse, in the standing
  leap.--Points to be carefully observed in the leap.--How to
  make the horse leap.--Management of the reins and of the
  rider's position during the leap.--Counsels which should be
  well learned by the rider before attempting the leap, and
  especially as to the management of the horse.--How to train a
  horse to leap.--A lady should never attempt the leap, except
  with a horse well trained in it.--Horses do not all leap
  alike.--The flying leap.--Important points to know relative
  to the flying leap.                                              249


CHAPTER XII.

DEFENSES OF THE HORSE, CRITICAL SITUATIONS.

 A lady's horse should be gentle, well-trained, and possess
  no vice.--Shying, and its treatment.--Shying sometimes due
  to defective vision, and at other times to
  discontent.--Balking, and its treatment.--Backing, and its
  treatment.--Gayety.--Kicking, and its remedy. An attention
  to the position and motions of the horse's ears will
  determine what he is about to do.--Plunging; bucking; what
  to do in these cases.--Rearing, and the course to be
  pursued.--Running away, and the course to be
  pursued.--Unsteadiness of the horse while being mounted,
  and how to correct it.--Stumbling, and its treatment.--What
  to do when the horse falls.--Remarks concerning the use of
  the whip and spur.--Be generous to the horse when he yields
  to his rider.                                                    271


ADDENDA.

 Thirty-four points necessary to be learned, and to be well
  understood by equestriennes.--Conclusion.                        301

GLOSSARY                                                           313

INDEX                                                              319




ILLUSTRATIONS.


   FIGURE                                                     PAGE

   1. HEAD OF ARABIAN STEED                                     24

   2. HEAD OF LOW-BRED HORSE                                    24

   3. WIDTH OF LOWER JAW IN THE THOROUGH-BRED                   26

   4. WIDTH OF THE LOWER JAW IN THE LOW-BRED                    26

   5. OBLIQUE SHOULDER                                          27

   6. STRAIGHT OR UPRIGHT SHOULDER                              28

   7. ENGLISH SADDLE                                            69

   8. STOKES' MODE OF GIRTHING THE SADDLE                       77

   9. VICTORIA STIRRUP                                          79

  10. SPRING-BAR FOR STIRRUP-LEATHER                            79

  11. LENNAN'S SAFETY STIRRUP                                   80

  12. LATCHFORD'S SAFETY STIRRUP                                81

  13. CHIFNEY BIT                                               84

  14. THE COMBINATION BIT                                       85

  15. DWYER'S CURB-BIT                                          86

  16. THE BIT ADJUSTED                                          90

  17. LADY READY TO MOUNT HER HORSE                            104

  18. LADY READY TO DISMOUNT                                   110

  19. CORRECT SEAT FOR A LADY (_Back view_)                    119

  20. CORRECT SEAT FOR A LADY (_Side view_)                    124

  21. CROOKED POSITION IN SADDLE (_Miss X._)                   129

  22. CROOKED POSITION IN SADDLE (_Mrs. Y._)                   133

  23. INCORRECT POSITION OF LEGS AND FEET (_Side view_)        136

  24. INCORRECT POSITION WHEN LEGS AND FEET ARE WRONGLY
        PLACED (_Back view_)                                   137

  25. SNAFFLE-REINS; ONE IN EACH HAND                          149

  26. SNAFFLE-REINS; BOTH IN THE LEFT HAND                     153

  27. DOUBLE BRIDLE; ALL REINS IN THE BRIDLE-HAND              162

  28. DOUBLE BRIDLE; A SNAFFLE AND A CURB REIN IN EACH HAND    166

  29. THE WALK                                                 185

  30. THE TROT                                                 205

  31. ENTERING UPON THE CANTER WITH THE RIGHT LEG LEADING      225

  32. THE FLYING GALLOP                                        243

  33. THE STANDING LEAP--RISING                                251

  34. THE STANDING LEAP--DESCENDING                            259

  35. THE HORSE                                                299




INTRODUCTION.

    "How melts my beating heart as I behold
    Each lovely nymph, our island's boast and pride,
    Push on the generous steed, that sweeps along
    O'er rough, o'er smooth, nor heeds the steepy hill,
    Nor falters in the extended vale below!"

                                            _The Chase._


Among ladies of wealth and culture in England, the equestrienne art
forms a portion of their education as much as the knowledge of their own
language, of French, or of music, and great care is taken that their
acquirements in this art shall be as thorough as those in any other
branch of their tuition. The mother bestows much of her own personal
supervision on her daughter's instruction, closely watching for every
little fault, and promptly correcting it when any becomes manifest. As a
result universally acknowledged, a young English lady, when riding a
well-trained and spirited horse, is a sight at once elegant and
attractive. She exhibits a degree of confidence, a firmness of seat, and
an ease and grace that can be acquired only by the most careful and
correct instruction. The fair rider guides her steed, without
abruptness, from walk to canter, from canter to trot, every movement in
perfect harmony; horse and rider being, as it were, of one thought.

    "Each look, each motion, awakes a new-born grace."

Unfortunately, at the present day, from want of careful study of the
subject, the majority of American lady riders, notwithstanding the
elegance of their forms and their natural grace, by no means equal their
English sisters in the art of riding. In most instances, a faulty
position in the saddle, an unsteadiness of seat, and a lack of sympathy
between horse and rider, occasion in the mind of the spectator a sense
of uneasiness lest the horse, in making playful movements, or, perhaps,
becoming slightly fractious, may unseat his rider,--a feeling which
quite destroys the charm and fascination she might otherwise exercise.
If my countrywomen would but make a master stroke, and add correct
horseback riding to the long list of accomplishments which they now
possess, they would become irresistible, and while delighting others,
would likewise promote their own physical well-being. There is no
cosmetic nor physician's skill which can preserve the bloom and
freshness of youth as riding can, and my fair readers, if they wish to
prolong those charms for which they are world renowned, charms whose
only fault is their too fleeting existence, must take exercise, and be
more in the fresh air and sunshine.

How much better to keep old age at bay by these innocent means, than to
resort to measures which give to the eye of the world a counterfeit
youth that will not deceive for a moment. Even an elderly lady may
without offense or harsh criticism recall some of the past joys of
younger years by an occasional ride for health or recreation, and, while
gracefully accepting her half century, or more, of life, she can still
retain some of the freshness and spirit of bygone years.

Not only is health preserved and life prolonged by exercise on
horseback, but, in addition, sickness is banished, or meliorated, and
melancholy, that dark demon which occasionally haunts even the most
joyous life, is overcome and driven back to the dark shades from whence
it came. Should the reader have the good fortune to possess an
intelligent horse, she can, when assailed by sorrows real or fancied,
turn to this true, willing friend, whose affectionate neigh of greeting
as she approaches, and whose pretty little graceful arts, will tend to
dispel her gloom, and, once in the saddle, speeding along through the
freshening air, fancied griefs are soon forgotten, while strength and
nerve are gained to face those troubles of a more serious nature, whose
existence cannot be ignored.

To the mistress who thoroughly understands the art of managing him, the
horse gives his entire affection and obedience, becomes her most willing
slave, submits to all her whims, and is proud and happy under her rule.

In disposition the horse is much like a child. Both are governed by
kindness combined with firmness; both meet indifference with
indifference, but return tenfold in love and obedience any care or
affection that is bestowed upon them. The horse also resembles the child
in the keenness with which he detects hypocrisy; no pretense of love or
interest will impose on either.

To the lady rider who has neither real fondness for her horse nor
knowledge of governing him, there is left but one resource by means of
which the animal can be controlled, and this is the passion of fear.
With a determined will, she may, by whipping, force him to obey, but
this means is not always reliable, especially with a high-spirited
animal, nor is it a method which any true woman would care to employ.
If, in addition to indifference to the horse, there be added nervousness
and timidity, which she finds herself unable to overcome by practice and
association, the lady might as well relinquish all attempt to become a
rider.

Should any of my readers think that these views of the relations between
horse and rider are too sentimental, that all which is needed in a horse
is easy movement, obedience to the reins, and readiness to go forward
when urged, and that love and respect are quite unnecessary, she will
find, should she ever meet with any really alarming object on the road,
that a little of this despised affection and confidence is very
desirable, for, in the moment of danger, the voice which has never
spoken in caressing accents, nor sought to win confidence will be
unheeded; fear will prevail over careful training, and the rider will be
very fortunate if she escapes without an accident. The writer is
sustained in the idea that the affection of the horse is essential to
the safety of the rider, not only by her own experience, but also by
that of some of the most eminent teachers of riding, and trainers of
horses.

Maud S. is an example of what a firm yet kind rule will effect in
bringing forth the capabilities of a horse. She has never had a harsh
word spoken to her, and has never been punished with the whip, but has,
on the contrary, been trained with the most patient and loving care; and
the result has been a speed so marvelous as to have positively
astonished the world, for although naturally high tempered, she will
strain every nerve to please her kind, loving master, when urged forward
by his voice alone.

Some ladies acquire a dislike for horseback riding, either because they
experience discomfort or uneasiness when in the saddle, or because the
movements of their horses cause them considerable fatigue. There may be
various reasons for this: the saddle may be too large, or too small, or
improperly made; or the rider's position in the saddle may be incorrect,
and as a consequence, the animal cannot be brought to his best paces.
Discomfort may occasionally be caused by an improperly made
riding-habit. The rider whose waist is confined by tight lacing cannot
adapt herself to the motions of her horse, and the graceful pliancy so
essential to good riding will, therefore, be lost. The lady who wears
tight corsets can never become a thorough rider, nor will the exercise
of riding give her either pleasure or health. She may manage to look
well when riding at a gait no faster than a walk, but, beyond this, her
motions will appear rigid and uncomfortable. A quick pace will induce
rapid circulation, and the blood, checked at the waist, will, like a
stream which has met with an obstacle in its course, turn into other
channels, rushing either to the heart, causing faintness, or to the
head, producing headache and vertigo. There have even been instances of
a serious nature, where expectoration of blood has been occasioned by
horseback riding, when the rider was tightly laced.

The naturally slender, symmetrical figure, when in the saddle, is the
perfection of beauty, but she whom nature has endowed with more ample
proportions will never attain this perfection by pinching her waist in.
Let the full figure be left to nature, its owner sitting well in the
saddle, on a horse adapted to her style, and she will make a very
imposing appearance, and prove a formidable rival to her more slender
companion.

There is a mistaken idea prevalent among certain persons, that horseback
riding induces obesity. It is true that, to a certain extent, riding
favors healthy muscular development, but the same may be said of all
kinds of exercise, and this effect, far from being objectionable, is
highly desirable, as it contributes to symmetry of form, as well as to
health and strength, conditions that in a large proportion of our
American women are unfortunately lacking. Those who ride on horseback
will find that while gaining in strength and proper physical tissue,
they will, at the same time, as a rule, be gradually losing all excess
of flesh; it is impossible for an active rider to become fat or flabby;
but the indolent woman who is prejudiced against exercise of any kind
will soon find the much dreaded calamity, corpulency, overtaking her,
and beauty of form more or less rapidly disappearing beneath a mountain
of flesh.

There are many persons who entertain the mistaken idea that instinct is
a sufficient guide in learning to ride; that it is quite unnecessary to
take any lessons or to make a study of the art of correct riding; and
that youth, a good figure, and practice are all that is required to make
a finished rider. This is a most erroneous opinion, which has been
productive of much harm to lady riders. The above qualifications are
undoubtedly great assistants, but without correct instruction they will
never produce an accomplished and graceful rider.

The instinctive horsewoman usually rides boldly and with perfect
satisfaction to herself, but to the eye of the connoisseur she presents
many glaring defects. Very bold, but, at the same time, very bad riding
is often seen among those who consider themselves very fine horsewomen.
In order to gain the reputation of a finished rider, it is not essential
that one should perform all the antics of a circus rider, nor that she
should ride a Mazeppian horse. The finished rider may be known by the
correctness of her attitude in the saddle, by her complete control of
her horse, and by the tranquillity of her motions when in city or park;
in such places she makes no attempt to ride at a very rapid trot, or
flying gallop-gaits which should be reserved for country roads, where
more speed is allowable.

There is still another false idea prevalent among a certain class of
people, which is that a love for horses, and for horseback riding
necessarily makes one coarse, and detracts from the refinement of a
woman's nature. It must be acknowledged that the coarseness of a vulgar
spirit can be nowhere more conspicuously displayed than in the saddle,
and yet in no place is the delicacy and decorum of woman more
observable. A person on horseback is placed in a position where every
motion is subject to critical observation and comment. The quiet,
simple costume, the easy movements, the absence of ostentatious display,
will always proclaim the refined, well-bred rider. Rudeness in the
saddle is as much out of place as in the parlor or salon, and greatly
more annoying to spectators, besides being disrespectful and dangerous
to other riders. Abrupt movements, awkward and rapid paces, frequently
cause neighboring horses to become restless, and even to run away.
Because a lady loves her horse, and enjoys riding him, it is by no means
necessary that she should become a Lady Gay Spanker, indulge in stable
talk, make familiars of grooms and stable boys, or follow the hounds in
the hunting field.

There are in this work no especial instructions given for the hunting
field, as the author does not consider it a suitable place for a lady
rider. She believes that no lady should risk life and limb in leaping
high and dangerous obstacles, but that all such daring feats should be
left to the other sex or to circus actresses. Nor would any woman who
really cared for her horse wish to run the risk of reducing him to the
deplorable condition of many horses that follow the hounds. In England,
where hunting is the favorite pastime among gentlemen, the number of
maimed and crippled horses that one meets is disheartening. Every lady,
however, who desires to become a finished rider, should learn to leap,
as this will not only aid her in securing a good seat in the saddle, but
may also prove of value in times of danger.

Before concluding I would again urge upon my readers the importance of
out-of-door exercise, which can hardly be taken in a more agreeable form
than that of horseback riding,--a great panacea, giving rest and
refreshment to the overworked brain of the student, counteracting many
of the pernicious effects of the luxurious lives of the wealthy, and
acting upon the workers of the world as a tonic, and as a stimulus to
greater exertion.




THE AMERICAN HORSEWOMAN.




CHAPTER I.

THE HORSE.

    "Look, when a painter would surpass the life,
    In limning out a well-proportioned steed,
    His art with Nature's workmanship at strife,
    As if the dead the living should exceed;
    So did this horse excel a common one,
    In shape, in courage, color, pace, and bone."
       *       *       *       *       *
    --"what a horse should have he did not lack,
    Save a proud rider on so proud a back."

                              _Venus and Adonis._


It is supposed that the original home of the horse was central Asia, and
that all the wild horses that range over the steppes of Tartary, the
pampas of South America, and the prairies of North America, are
descendants of this Asiatic stock.[1] There is, in the history of the
world, no accurate statement of the time when the horse was first
subjugated by man, but so far back as his career can be traced in the
dim and shadowy past, he seems to have been man's servant and companion.
We find him, on the mysterious ruins of ancient Egypt, represented with
his badge of servitude, the bridle; he figures in myth and fable as the
companion of man and gods; he is a prominent figure in the pictured
battle scenes of the ancient world; and has always been a favorite theme
with poet, historian, and philosopher in all ages.

  Footnote 1: A very interesting work, by C. A. Piétrement, has recently
  been issued in France, entitled _Les chevaux dans les temps
  prehistorique et historique_. The author shows that wild horses were
  hunted and eaten by man in the rough stone age. He also determines in
  what European and Asiatic regions the eight extant horse families were
  domesticated, and traces their various wanderings over the earth,
  deducing many interesting facts from the history of their migrations.

The first written record, known to us, of the subjection of the horse to
man is found in the Bible, where in Genesis (xlvii. 17) it is stated
that Joseph gave the Egyptians bread in exchange for their horses, and
in 1. 9, we read that when Joseph went to bury his father Jacob, there
went with him the servants of the house of Pharaoh, the elders of the
land of Egypt, together with "chariots and horsemen" in numbers.
Jeremiah compares the speed of the horse with the swiftness of the
eagle; and Job's description of the war charger has never been
surpassed.

Ancient Rome paid homage to the horse by a yearly festival, when every
one abstained from labor, and the day was made one of feasting and
frolic. The horse, decked with garlands, and with gay and costly
trappings, was led in triumph through the streets, followed by a
multitude who loudly proclaimed in verse and song his many good services
to man.

This adulation of the horse sometimes went beyond the bounds of reason,
as in the case of Caligula, who carried his love for his horse,
Incitatus, to an insane degree. He had a marble palace erected for a
stable, furnished it with mangers of ivory and gold, and had sentinels
guard it at night that the repose of his favorite might not be
disturbed. Another elegant palace was fitted up in the most splendid and
costly style, and here the animal's visitors were entertained. Caligula
required all who called upon himself to visit Incitatus also, and to
treat the animal with the same respect and reverence as that observed
towards a royal host. This horse was frequently introduced at Caligula's
banquets, where he was presented with gilded oats, and with wine from a
golden cup. Historians state that Caligula would even have made his
steed consul of Rome, had not the tyrant been opportunely assassinated,
and the world freed from an insane fiend.

In the legends of the Middle Ages the knight-errant and his gallant
steed were inseparable, and together performed doughty deeds of valor
and chivalry. In our present more prosaic age, the horse has been
trained to such a degree of perfection in speed and motion as was never
dreamed of by the ancients or by the knights of the crusades; and there
has been given to the world an animal that is a marvel of courage,
swiftness, and endurance, while, at the same time, so docile, that the
delicate hand of woman can completely control him.

The Arabian is the patrician among horses; he is the most intelligent,
the most beautifully formed, and, when kindly treated, the gentlest of
his race. He is especially noted for his keenness of perception, his
retentive memory, his powers of endurance, and, when harshly or cruelly
treated, for his fierce resentment and ferociousness, which nothing but
death can conquer. In his Arabian home he is guarded as a treasure, is
made one of the family and treated with the most loving care. This close
companionship creates an affection and confidence between the horse and
his master which is almost unbounded; while the kindness with which the
animal is treated seems to brighten his intelligence as well as to
render him gentle.

When these horses were first introduced into Europe they seemed, after a
short stay in civilization, to have completely changed their nature,
and, instead of gentleness and docility, exhibited an almost tiger-like
ferocity. This change was at first attributed to difference of climate
and high feeding, but, after several grooms had been injured or killed
by their charges, it began to be suspected that there was something
wrong in the treatment. The experiment of introducing native grooms was
therefore tried, and the results proved most satisfactory, the animals
once more becoming gentle and docile.[2] Since then the nature of the
Arabian has become better understood, and, both in this country and in
Europe, he shows, at the present day, a decided improvement upon the
original native of the desert. He is larger and swifter, yet still
retains all the spirit as well as docility of his ancestors. In America
his descendants are called "thorough-breds," and Americans may well be
proud of this race of horses, which is rapidly becoming world renowned.

  Footnote 2: "The Bedouin (and every other race of Orientals that I am
  acquainted with seems to possess somewhat the same quality) exhibits a
  patience towards his horse as remarkable as is the impatience and
  roughness of the Englishman.... In his (the Oriental's) mental
  organization some screw is tight which in the English mind is loose;
  he is sane on a point where the Englishman is slightly cracked, and he
  rides on serene and contented where the latter would go into a
  paroxysm of swearing and spurring. I have seen an Arab horse, broken
  loose at a moment when our camp was thronged with horses brought for
  sale, turn the whole concern topsy-turvy, and reduce it to one tumult
  of pawing and snorting and belligerent screeching; and I never yet saw
  the captor when he finally got hold of the halter show the least trace
  of anger, or do otherwise than lead the animal back to his picket with
  perfect calmness. Contrast this with the 'job' in the mouth and the
  kick in the ribs and the curse that the English groom would bestow
  under similar circumstances, and you have, in a great measure, the
  secret of the good temper of the Arab horse in Arab
  hands."--_Blackwood's Magazine_, 1859.

Before purchasing a saddle-horse, several points should be considered.
First, =the style of the rider's figure=; for a horse which would be
suitable for a large, stout person would not be at all desirable for one
having a small, slender figure. A large, majestic looking woman would
present a very absurd spectacle when mounted upon a slightly built,
slender horse; his narrow back in contrast with that of his rider would
cause hers to appear even larger and wider than usual, and thus give her
a heavy and ridiculous appearance, while the little horse would look
overburdened and miserable, and his step, being too short for his rider,
would cause her to experience an unpleasant sensation of embarrassment
and restraint. On the other hand, a short, light, slender rider, seated
upon a tall broad-backed animal, would appear equally out of place; the
step of the horse being, in her case, too long, would make her seat
unsteady and insecure, so that instead of a sense of enjoyment,
exhilaration, and benefit from the ride, she would experience only
fatigue and dissatisfaction.

If the rider be tall and rather plump, the horse should be fifteen hands
and three inches in height, and have a somewhat broad back. A lady below
the medium height, and of slender proportions, will look equally well
when riding a pony fourteen hands high, or a horse fifteen hands. An
animal fifteen hands, or fifteen hands and two inches in height, will
generally be found suitable for all ladies who are not excessively large
and tall, or very short and slender. In all cases, however, the back of
the horse should be long enough to appear well under the side-saddle,
for a horse with a short back never presents a fine aspect when carrying
a woman. In such cases, the side-saddle extends from his withers nearly,
if not quite, to his hips, and as the riding skirt covers his left side,
little is seen of the horse except his head and tail. Horses with very
short backs are usually good weight-carriers, but their gaits are apt to
be rough and uneasy.

Another point to be considered in the selection of a horse is, what gait
or gaits are best suited to the rider, and here again the lady should
take her figure into consideration. The walk, trot, canter, and gallop
are the only gaits recognized by English horsewomen, but in America the
walk, rack, pace, and canter are the favorite gaits. If the lady's
figure be slender and elegant, any of the above named gaits will suit
her, but should she be large or stout, a brisk walk or easy canter
should be selected. The rapid gallop and all fast gaits should be left
to light and active riders.

The fast or running walk is a very desirable gait for any one, but is
especially so for middle-aged or stout people, who cannot endure much
jolting; it is also excellent for delicate women, for poor riders, or
for those who have long journeys to make which they wish to accomplish
speedily and without undue fatigue to themselves or their horses. A good
sound horse who has been trained to this walk can readily travel thirty
or forty miles a day, or even more. This gait is adapted equally well to
the street, the park, and the country road; but it must be acknowledged
that horses possessing it rarely have any other that is desirable, and,
indeed, any other would be apt to impair the ease and harmony of the
animal's movements in this walk.

The French or cavalry trot (see page 203) should never be ridden on the
road by a woman, as the movements of the horse in this gait are so very
rough that the most accomplished rider cannot keep a firm, steady seat.
The body is jolted in a peculiar and very unpleasant manner, occasioning
a sense of fatigue that is readily appreciated, though difficult to
describe.

The country jog-trot is another very fatiguing gait, although farmers,
who ride it a good deal, state that "after one gets used to it, it is
not at all tiresome." But a lady's seat in the saddle is so different
from that of a gentleman's that she can never ride this gait without
excessive fatigue.

A rough racker or pacer will prove almost as wearisome as the
jog-trotter. Indeed, if she wishes to gain any pleasure or benefit from
riding, a lady should never mount a horse that is at all stiff or uneven
in his movements, no matter what may be his gait.

The easiest of all gaits to ride, although the most difficult to learn,
is the English trot. This is especially adapted to short persons, who
can ride it to perfection. A tall woman will be apt to lean too far
forward when rising in it, and her specialties, therefore, should be
the canter and the gallop, in which she can appear to the greatest
advantage. The rack, and the pace of a horse that has easy movements are
not at all difficult to learn to ride, and are, consequently, the
favorite gaits of poor riders.

In selecting a horse his =temperament= must also be considered. A
high-spirited, nervous animal, full of vitality, highly satisfactory as
he might prove to some, would be only a source of misery to others of
less courageous dispositions. First lessons in riding should be taken
upon a horse of cold temperament and kindly disposition who will resent
neither mistakes nor awkwardness. Having learned to ride and to manage a
horse properly, no steed can then be too mettlesome for the healthy and
active lady pupil, provided he has no vices and possesses the good
manners that should always belong to every lady's horse.

It is a great mistake to believe, as many do, that a weak, slightly
built horse is yet capable of carrying a woman. On the contrary, a
lady's horse should be the soundest and best that can be procured, and
should be able to carry with perfect ease a weight much greater than
hers. A slight, weak animal, if ridden much by a woman, will be certain
to "get out of condition," will become unsound in the limbs of one
side, usually the left, and will soon wear out.

Before buying a horse, the lady who is to ride him should be weighed,
and should then have some one who is considerably heavier than herself
ride the animal, that she may be sure that her own weight will not be
too great for him. If he carries the heavier weight with ease, he can,
of course, carry her.

In selecting a horse great care should be taken to ascertain whether
there is the least trace of =unsoundness in his feet and legs=, and
especially that variety of unsoundness which occasions stumbling. The
best of horses, when going over rough places or when very tired may
stumble, and so will indolent horses that are too lazy when traveling to
lift their feet up fully; but when this fault is due to disease, or
becomes a habit with a lazy animal, he should never be used under the
side-saddle.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.--Head of Arabian Steed.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.--Head of Low-Bred Horse.]

If the reader will glance at Figs. 1 and 2, she will observe the
difference between the head of the low-bred horse and that of the best
bred of the race. Fig. 1 represents the head of an Arabian horse; the
brain is wide between the eyes, the brow high and prominent, and the
expression of the face high-bred and intelligent. Fig. 2 shows the head
of a low-bred horse, whose stupid aspect and small brain are very
manifest. The one horse will be quick to comprehend what is required of
him, and will appreciate any efforts made to brighten his intelligence,
while the other will be slow to understand, almost indifferent to the
kindness of his master, and apt, when too much indulged, to return
treachery for good treatment. The whip, when applied to the latter as a
means of punishment, will probably cow him, but, if used for the same
purpose on the former, will rouse in him all the hot temper derived from
his ancestors, and in the contest which ensues between his master and
himself, he will conquer, or terminate the strife his own death, or that
of his master.

Another noticeable feature in the Arab horse, and one usually considered
significant of an active and wide-awake temperament, is the width and
expansiveness of the nostrils. These, upon the least excitement, will
quiver and expand, and in a rapid gallop will stand out freely, giving a
singularly spirited look to the animal's face.

The shape and size of the ears are also indications of high or low
birth. In the high-bred horse they are generally small, thin, and
delicate on their outer margins, with the tips inclined somewhat towards
one another. By means of these organs the animal expresses his different
emotions of anger, fear, dislike, or gayety. They may be termed his
language, and their various movements can readily be understood when one
takes a little trouble to study their indications. The ears of a
low-bred horse are large, thick, and covered with coarse hair; they
sometimes lop or droop horizontally, protruding from the sides of the
head and giving a very sheepish look to the face; they rarely move, and
express very little emotion of any kind.

The eye of the desert steed is very beautiful, possessing all the
brilliancy and gentleness so much admired in that of the gazelle. Its
expression in repose is one of mildness and amiability, but, under the
influence of excitement, it dilates widely and sparkles. A horse which
has small eyes set close together, no matter what excellences he may
possess in other respects, is sure to have some taint of inferior blood.
Some of the coarser breeds have the large eye of the Arabian, but it
will usually be found that they have some thorough-bred among their
ancestors.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.--Width of lower jaw in the thorough-bred.]

Width between the sides or branches of the lower jaw is another
distinctive feature of the horse of pure descent. (Fig. 3.) A wide
furrow or channel between the points mentioned is necessary for speed,
in order to allow room for free respiration when the animal is in rapid
motion. The coarser breeds have very small, narrow channels (Fig. 4),
and very rapid motion soon distresses them.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.--Width of lower jaw in the low-bred.]

The mouth of the well-bred horse is large, allowing ample room for the
bit, and giving him a determined and energetic, but at the same time
pleasant, amiable expression. The mouth of the low-bred horse is small
and covered with coarse hair, and gives the animal a sulky, dejected
appearance.

[Illustration: Fig. 5.--Oblique shoulder. The angle at the joint being
about 45°.]

The light, elegant head of the Arabian is well set on his neck; a slight
convexity at the upper part of the throat gives freedom to the functions
of this organ, as well as elasticity to the movements of the head and
neck; and the _encolure_, or crest of the neck, is arched with a
graceful curve. But it is especially in the shape of the shoulders that
this horse excels all others, and this is the secret of those easy
movements which make him so desirable for the saddle. These shoulders
are deep, and placed obliquely at an angle of about 45°; they act like
the springs of a well-made carriage, diminishing the shock or jar of his
movements. They are always accompanied by a deep chest, high withers,
and fore-legs set well forward, qualities which make the horse much
safer for riding. (Fig. 5.)

[Illustration: Fig. 6.--Straight or upright shoulder. The angle at the
joint being more than 45°.]

The animal with straight shoulders, no matter how well shaped in other
respects, can never make a good saddle-horse, and should be at once
rejected. These shoulders are usually accompanied by low withers, and
fore-legs placed too far under the body, which arrangement causes the
rider an unpleasant jar every time a fore-foot touches the ground.
Moreover, the gait of the horse is constrained and not always safe, and
if he be used much under the saddle his fore-feet will soon become
unsound. This straight, upright shoulder is characteristic of the
coarser breeds of horses, and is frequently associated with a short,
thick neck. Such horses are not only unfit for the saddle, but, when any
speed is desired, are unsuitable even for a pleasure carriage. (Fig. 6.)

The haunch of the low-bred horse is generally large, but not so well
formed as that of the thorough-bred. This portion of the Arabian courser
is wide, indicating strength, and force to propel himself forward, while
his tail, standing out gayly when he is in motion, projects in a line
with his back-bone. His forearm is large, long, and muscular,[3] his
knees broad and firm, his hocks of considerable size, while his
cannon-bone, situated between the knee and the fetlock, is short,
although presenting a broad appearance when viewed laterally.

  Footnote 3: "There is, however, a medium in this, and the advantage of
  length in the arm will depend on the use to which the horse is
  applied. The lady's horse, the cavalry horse, every horse in which
  prancing action is esteemed a beauty, and in which utility is, to a
  certain degree, sacrificed to appearance, must not be too long in the
  arm. If he is long there, he will be proportionally short in the leg;
  and although this is an undoubted excellence, whether speed or
  continuance is regarded, the short leg will not give the grand and
  imposing action which fashion may require. In addition to this, a
  horse with short legs may not have quite so easy an action as another
  whose length is in the shank rather than in the arms."--_W. Youatt._

On each front leg, at the back of the knee, there is a bony projection,
giving attachments to the flexor muscles, and affording protection to
certain tendons. The Orientals set a great value upon the presence of
this bone, believing that it favors muscular action, and the larger this
prominence is the more highly do they prize the animal that possesses
it. The pasterns of the high-bred horse are of medium length, and very
elastic, while the foot is circular and of moderate size.

In the preceding description, the author has endeavored to make plain to
the reader the most important points to be observed in both the
high-bred and the low-bred horse, and has given the most pronounced
characteristics of each.

Between these extremes, however, there are many varieties of horses,
possessing more or less of the Arabian characteristics mingled with
those of other races. Some of the best American horses are numbered
among these mixed races, and, by many, are considered an improvement
upon the Arabian, as they are excellent for light carriages and buggies.
The more they resemble the Oriental steed, the better they are for the
saddle.

The lady who, in this country, cannot find a horse to suit her, will,
indeed, be difficult to please. It will be best for her to tell some
gentleman what sort of horse she wishes, and let him select for her;
but, at the same time, it can do no harm, and may prove a great
advantage to her to know all the requisite points of a good
saddle-horse. It will not take long to learn them, and the knowledge
gained will prevent her from being imposed upon by the ignorant or
unscrupulous. Gentlemen, even those who consider themselves good judges
of horse-flesh, are sometimes guilty of very serious blunders in
selecting a horse for a lady's use; and should the lady be obliged to
negotiate directly with a horse-dealer, she must bear in mind constantly
the fact that, although there are reliable and honorable dealers to be
found, there are many who would not scruple to cheat even a woman. A
careful perusal of the present work, together with the advice of an
_upright_ and _trustworthy_ veterinary surgeon, or a skilled
riding-master, will aid her in protecting herself from the impositions
of unprincipled horse-jockeys and self-styled "veterinary doctors."

In any case, whatever be the other characteristics of the animal
selected, be sure that he has the oblique shoulder, as well as depth of
shoulder, and hind-legs well bent. Without these characteristics he will
be unfit for a lady's use, as his movements will be rough and unsafe,
and the saddle will be apt to turn.

If it be desired to purchase a horse for a moderate price, certain
points which might be insisted on in a high-priced animal will have to
be dispensed with; for instance, his color may not be satisfactory; he
may not have a pretty head, or a well-set tail, etc., but these
deficiencies may be overlooked if he be sound, have good action, and no
vices. He may be handsome, well-actioned, and thoroughly trained, but
have a slight defect in his wind, noticeable only when he is urged into
a rapid trot, or a gallop. If wanted for street and park service only,
and if the purchaser does not care for fast riding, a horse of this
sort will suit her very well. Sometimes a horse of good breed, as well
as of good form, has never had the advantages of a thorough training, or
he may be worn out by excessive work. Should he be comparatively young,
rest and proper training may still make a good horse of him, but great
care should be taken to assure one's self that no permanent disease or
injury exists. The Orientals have a proverb, that it is well to bear in
mind when buying an animal of the kind just described:--"Ruin, son of
ruin, is he who buys to cure."

Always examine with great care a horse's mouth. A hard-mouthed animal is
a very unpleasant one for a lady to ride, and is apt to degenerate into
a runaway. Scars at the angles of the mouth are good indications of a
"bolter," or runaway, or at least of cruel treatment, and harsh usage is
by no means a good instructor.

While a very short-backed horse does not appear to great advantage under
a side-saddle, he may, nevertheless, have many good qualities that will
compensate for this defect, and it may be overlooked provided the price
asked for him be reasonable; but horses of this kind frequently command
a high price when their action is exceptionally good. Corns on the feet
generally depreciate the value of a horse, although they may sometimes
be cured by removing the shoes, and giving him a free run of six or
eight months in a pasture of soft ground; if he be then properly shod,
and used on country roads only, he may become permanently serviceable.
There is, however, considerable risk in buying a horse that has corns,
and the purchaser should remember the Oriental proverb just referred to,
and not forget the veterinary surgeon.

Before paying for a horse, the lady should insist upon having him on
trial for at least a month, that she may have an opportunity of
discovering his vices or defects, if any such exist. She must be careful
not to condemn him too hastily, and should, when trying him, make due
allowance for his change of quarters and also for the novelty of
carrying a new rider, as some horses are very nervous until they become
well acquainted with their riders. Should the horse's movements prove
rough, should he be found hard-mouthed, or should any indications of
unsoundness or viciousness be detected, he should be immediately
returned to his owner. It must be remembered, however, that very few
horses are perfect, and that minor defects may, in most instances, be
overlooked if the essentials are secured. Before rejecting the horse,
the lady should also be very sure that the faults to which she objects
are not due to her own mismanagement of him. But if she decides that she
is not at fault, no amount of persuasion should induce her to purchase.
In justice to the owner of the horse, he ought to be reasonably paid for
the time and services of his rejected animal; but if it be decided to
keep the horse, then only the purchase-money originally agreed upon
should be paid.

The surest and best way of securing a good saddle-horse is to purchase,
from one of the celebrated breeding farms, a well-shaped four-year-old
colt of good breed, and have him taught the gaits and style of movement
required. Great care should be taken in the selection of his teacher,
for if the colt's temper be spoiled by injudicious treatment, he will be
completely ruined for a lady's use. A riding-school teacher will
generally understand all the requirements necessary for a lady's
saddle-horse, and may be safely intrusted with the animal's education.
If no riding-school master of established reputation as a trainer can be
had, it may be possible to secure the services of some one near the
lady's home, as she can then superintend the colt's education herself
and be sure that he is treated neither rashly nor cruelly.

The ideas concerning the education of the horse have completely changed
within the last twenty-five years. The whip as a means of punishment is
entirely dispensed with in the best training schools of the present day,
and, instead of rough and brutal measures, kindness, firmness, and
patience are now the only means employed to train and govern him. The
theory of this modern system of training may be found in the following
explanation of a celebrated English trainer, who subdued his horses by
exhibiting towards them a wonderful degree of patience:--"If I enter
into a contest with the horse, he will fling and prance, and there will
be no knowing which will be master; whereas if I remain quiet and
determined, I have the best of it."

The following is an example of the patience with which this man carried
out his theory:--

Being once mounted on a very obstinate colt that refused to move in the
direction desired, he declined all suggestions of severe measures, and
after one or two gentle but fruitless attempts to make the animal move,
he desisted, and having called for his pipe, sat there quietly for a
couple of hours enjoying a good smoke, and chatting gayly with passing
friends. Then after another quiet but unsuccessful attempt to induce
the colt to move, he sent for some dinner which he ate while still on
the animal's back. As night approached and the air became cool, he sent
for his overcoat and more tobacco, and proceeded to make a night of it.
About this time the colt became uneasy, but not until midnight did he
show any disposition to move in the required direction. Now was the time
for the master to assert himself. "Whoa!" he cried, "you have stayed
here so long to please yourself, now you will stay a little longer to
please me." He then kept the colt standing in the same place an hour
longer, and when he finally allowed him to move, it was in a direction
opposite to that which the colt seemed disposed to take. He walked the
animal slowly for five miles, then allowed him to trot back to his
stable, and finally--as if he had been a disobedient child--sent him
supperless to bed, giving him the rest of the night in which to meditate
upon the effects of his obstinacy.

To some this may seem a great deal of useless trouble to take with a
colt that might have been compelled to move more promptly by means of
whip or spur; but that day's experience completely subdued the colt's
stubborn spirit, and all idea of rebellion to human authority was
banished from his mind forever. Had a contrary course been pursued, it
would probably have made the creature headstrong, balky, and unreliable;
he would have yielded to the whip and spur at one time only to battle
the more fiercely against them at the first favorable opportunity, and
his master would never have known at what minute he might have to enter
into a contest with him. That a horse trained by violent means can never
be trusted is a fact which is every day becoming better recognized and
appreciated.

"A great many accidents might be avoided," says a well-known authority
upon the education of the horse, "could the populace be instructed to
think a horse was endowed with senses, was gifted with feelings, and was
able in some degree to appreciate motives."... "The strongest man cannot
physically contend against the weakest horse. Man's power reposes in
better attributes than any which reside in thews and muscles. Reason
alone should dictate and control his conduct. Thus guided, mortals have
subdued the elements. For power, when mental, is without limit: by
savage violence nothing is attained and man is often humbled."

The lady who has the good fortune to live in the country where she can
have so many opportunities for studying the disposition and character
of her animals, and can, if she chooses, watch and superintend the
education of her horse from the time he is a colt, has undoubtedly a
better chance of securing a fine saddle-horse than she who lives in the
city and is obliged to depend almost entirely upon others for the
training of her horse. Indeed, very little formal training will be
necessary for a horse that has been brought up under the eye of a kind
and judicious mistress, for he will soon learn to understand and obey
the wishes of one whom he loves and trusts, and if she be an
accomplished rider she can do the greater part of the training herself.

The best and most trustworthy horse the author ever had was one that was
trained almost from his birth. Fay's advent was a welcome event to the
children of the family, by whom he was immediately claimed and used as a
play-fellow. By the older members of the family he was always regarded
as part of the household,--an honored servant, to be well cared
for,--and he was petted and fondled by all, from paterfamilias down to
Bridget in the kitchen. He was taught, among other tricks, to bow
politely when anything nice was given him, and many were the journeys he
made around to the kitchen window, where he would make his obeisance in
such an irresistible manner that Bridget would be completely captivated;
and the dainty bits were passed through the window in such quantities
and were swallowed with such avidity that the lady of the house had to
interfere and restrict the donations to two cakes daily.

Fay had been taught to shake hands with his admirers, and this trick was
called his "word of honor;" he had his likes and dislikes, and would
positively refuse to honor some people with a hand-shake. If these
slighted individuals insisted upon riding him, he made them so
uncomfortable by the roughness of his gaits that they never cared to
repeat the experiment. But the favored ones, whom he had received into
his good graces and to whom he had given his "word of honor," he would
carry safely anywhere, at his lightest and easiest gait. Fay never went
back on his word, which is more than can be said of some human beings.

The great difficulty in training a horse for a lady's use is to get him
well placed on his haunches. In Fay's case this was accomplished by
teaching him to place his fore-feet upon a stout inverted tub, about two
feet high. When he offered his "hand" for a shake, some one pushed
forward the tub, upon which his "foot" dropped and was allowed to
remain a short time, when the other foot was treated in the same manner.
After half a dozen lessons of this sort, he learned to put up his feet
without assistance; first one, and then the other, and, finally, both at
once. These performances were always rewarded by a piece of apple or
cake, together with expressions of pleasure from the by-standers. Fay
had a weakness for flattery, and no actor called before the curtain ever
expressed more pleasure at an _encore_ than did Fay when applauded for
his efforts to please. That the tub trick would prove equally effectual
with other horses in teaching them to place themselves well on their
haunches cannot be positively stated. It might prove more troublesome to
teach most horses this trick than to have them placed upon their
haunches in the usual way by means of a strong curb, or by lessons with
the lunge line. It proved entirely successful in Fay's case, and a horse
lighter in hand or easier in gait was never ridden by a woman.

Fay's training began when he was only a few weeks old: a light halter
and a loose calico surcingle were placed on him for a short time each
day, during which time he was carefully watched lest he should do
himself some injury. When he was about eight months old, a small bit,
made of a smooth stick of licorice, was put into his mouth, and to this
bit light leather reins were fastened by pieces of elastic rubber: this
rubber relieved his mouth from a constant dead pull, and tended to
preserve its delicate sensibility. Thus harnessed he was led around the
lawn, followed by a crowd of youthful admirers and playmates, who formed
a sort of triumphal procession, with which the colt was as well pleased
as the spectators. Every attempt on his part to indulge in horse-play,
such as biting, kicking, etc., was always quickly checked, and no one
was allowed to tease or strike him.

Nothing heavier than a dumb jockey was put on his back until he was four
years old, when his education began in sober earnest. After a few
lessons with the lunge line, given by a regular trainer, a saddle was
put on his back, and for the first time in his life he carried a human
being.

When learning his different riding gaits on the road, he was always
accompanied by a well-trained saddle-horse, aided by whose example as
well as by the efforts of his rider he was soon trained in three
different styles of movement, namely, a good walk, trot, and hand
gallop. Fear seemed unknown to this horse, for he had always been
allowed as a colt to follow his dam on the road, and had thus become so
accustomed to all such alarming objects as steam engines, hay carts,
etc., that they had ceased to occasion him the least uneasiness. This
high spirited and courageous animal had perfect confidence in the world
and looked upon all mankind as friendly. His constant companionship with
human beings had sharpened his perceptive faculties, and made him quick
to understand whatever was required of him. The kindness shown him was
never allowed to degenerate into weakness or over-indulgence, and
whenever anything was required of him it was insisted upon until
complete obedience was obtained. In this way he was taught to understand
that man was his master and superior.

Although it is not absolutely essential that a lady's horse should learn
the tricks of bowing, hand-shaking, etc., yet the lady who will take the
pains to teach her horse some of them will find that she not only gets a
great deal of pleasure from the lessons, but that they enable her to
gain more complete control over him, for the horse, like some other
animals, gives affection and entire obedience to the person who makes an
effort to increase his intelligence.

Lessons with the lunge line should always be short, as they are very
fatiguing to a young colt, and when given too often or for too great a
length of time they make him giddy from rush of blood to the head; not a
few instances, indeed, have occurred where a persistence in such lessons
has occasioned complete blindness.

A lady's horse should be taught to disregard the flapping of the
riding-skirt, and it is also well for him to become accustomed to having
articles of various kinds, such as pieces of cloth, paper, etc.,
fluttering about him, as he will not then be likely to take fright
should any part of the rider's costume become disarranged and blow about
him.

He should also be so trained that he will not mind having the saddle
moved from side to side on his back. The best of riders may have her
saddle turn, and if the horse be thus trained he will neither kick nor
run away should such an accident occur.

It is also very important that the horse should be taught to stop,
and stand as firm as a rock at the word of command given in a low,
firm tone. This habit is not only important in mounting and
dismounting,--feats which it is difficult, if not impossible, for the
lady to perform unless the horse be perfectly still,--but the rider
will also find this prompt obedience of great assistance in checking
her horse when he becomes frightened and tries to break away; for he
will stop instinctively when he hears the familiar order given in the
voice to which he is accustomed.

A lady should not fail to visit her horse's stable from time to time, in
order to assure herself that he is well treated and properly cared for
by the groom. Viciousness and restlessness on the road can often be
traced to annoyances and ill-treatment in the stable. Grooms and stable
boys sometimes like to see the horse kick out and attempt to bite, and
will while away their idle hours in harassing him, tickling his ears
with straws, or touching him up with the whip in order to make him
prance and strike out. The result of these annoyances will be that, if
the lady during her ride accidentally touches her horse with the whip,
he will begin prancing and kicking; or, if it is summer time, the gnats
and flies swarming about his ears will make him unmanageable. In the
latter case, ear-tips will only make the matter worse, especially if
they have dangling tassels. When such signs of nervousness are
noticeable, especially in a horse that has been hitherto gentle, they
may usually be attributed to the treatment of the groom or his
assistants.

Most grooms delight in currying their charges with combs having teeth
like small spikes and in laying on the polishing brush with a hand as
heavy as the blows of misfortune. Some animals, it is true, like this
kind of rubbing, but there are many, who have thin, delicate skins, to
whom such treatment is almost unmitigated torture. Should the lady hear
any contest going on between the horse and groom during the former's
morning toilette, she should order a blunt curry-comb to be used; or
even dispense with a comb altogether, and let the brush only be applied
with a light hand. Grooms sometimes take pleasure in throwing cold water
over their horses. In very warm weather, and when the animal is not
overheated, this treatment may prove refreshing to him, but, as a
general rule it is objectionable, as it is apt to occasion a sudden
chill which may result in serious consequences.

The stable man may grumble at the lady's interference and supervision,
but she must not allow this to prevent her from attending carefully to
the welfare of the animal whose faithful services contribute so largely
to her pleasure. When she buys a horse she introduces a new member into
her household, who should be as well looked after and cared for as any
other faithful servant or friend. Indeed, the horse is the more
entitled to consideration in that he is entirely helpless, and his lot
for good or evil lies wholly in her power. If the mistress is careless
or neglects her duty, the servants in whose charge the horse is placed
will be very apt to follow her example, and the poor animal will suffer
accordingly.

Perhaps the lady, however, may object to entering the stable, and agree
with the groom in thinking it "no place for a woman." Or she may fear
that in carrying out the ideas suggested above she will expose herself
to the ridicule of thoughtless acquaintances who can never do anything
until it has received the sanction of fashion.

For the benefit of this fastidious individual and her timid friends we
will quote the example of the Empress of Austria, who, although
occupying an exalted position at a court where etiquette is carried to
the extremes of formality, yet does not hesitate to visit the stable of
her favorite steeds and personally to supervise their welfare; and woe
to the perverse groom who in the least particular disobeys her commands.

Many other examples might be given of high-born ladies, such as Queen
Victoria, the Princess of Wales, the Princess of Prussia, and others,
who do not seem to consider it at all unfeminine or coarse for a woman
to give some personal care and supervision to her horses. But to enter
into more details would prove tiresome, and the example given is enough
to silence the scruples of the followers of fashion.

Like all herbivorous creatures that love to roam in herds, the horse is
naturally of a restless temperament. Activity is the delight of his
existence, and when left to nature and a free life he is seldom quiet.
Man takes this creature of buoyant nature from the freedom of its
natural life, and confines the active body in a prison house where its
movements are even more circumscribed than are those of the wild beasts
in the menagerie; they can at least turn around and walk from side to
side in their cages, but the horse in his narrow stall is able only to
move his head from side to side, to paw a little with his fore-feet, and
to move backwards and forwards a short distance, varying with the length
of his halter; when he lies down to sleep he is compelled to keep in one
position, and runs the risk of meeting with some serious accident. In
some stables where the grooms delight in general stagnation, the horses
under their charge are not allowed to indulge in even the smallest
liberty. The slightest movement is punished by the lash of these
silence-loving tyrants, in whose opinion the horse has enough occupation
and excitement in gazing at the blank boards directly in front of his
head. If these boards should happen to be whitewashed, as is often the
case in the country, constant gazing at them will be almost sure to give
rise to shying, or even to occasion blindness. If the reader will, for
several minutes, gaze steadily at a white wall, she will he able to get
some idea of the poor horse's sensations.

Is it then to be wondered at, that an animal of an excitable nature like
the horse should, when released from the oppressive quiescence of his
prison-house, act as if bereft of reason, and perform strange antics and
caperings in his insane delight at once more breathing the fresh air,
and seeing the outside world. But, while the horse is thus expressing
his pleasure and recovering the use of limbs by vigorous kicks, or is
expending his superfluous energy by bounding out of the road at every
strange object he encounters, the saddle will be neither a safe nor
pleasant place for the lady rider. To avoid such danger, and to
compensate, in some degree, the liberty-loving animal for depriving him
of his natural life and placing him in bondage, he should be given,
instead of the usual narrow stall, a box stall, measuring about sixteen
or eighteen feet square. In this box the horse should be left entirely
free, without even a halter, as this appendage has sometimes been the
cause of fearful accidents, by becoming entangled with the horse's feet.

The groom may grumble again at this innovation, because a box stall
means more work for him, but if he really cares for the horses under his
charge he will soon become reconciled to the small amount of extra work
required by the use of a box stall. Every one who knows anything about a
horse in the stable is well aware of the injury done to this animal's
feet and limbs by compelling him to stand always confined to one spot in
a narrow stall. A box will prevent the occurrence of these injuries,
besides giving the horse a little freedom and enabling him to get more
rest and benefit from his sleep.

Some horses are fond of looking through a window or over a half door.
The glimpse they thus get of the outside life seems to amuse and
interest them, and it can do no harm to gratify this desire. Others,
however, seem to be worried and excited by such outlooks; they become
restless and even make attempts to leap over the half door or through
the window. In such cases there should, of course, be no out-of-door
scenery visible from the box.

The groom should exercise the horse daily, in a gentle and regular
manner; an hour or two of walking, varied occasionally by a short trot,
will generally be found sufficient. Being self-taught in the art of
riding, grooms nearly always have a very heavy bridle hand, and, if
allowed to use the curb bit, will soon destroy that sensitiveness of the
horse's mouth which adds so much to the pleasure of riding him. The man
who exercises the horse should not be permitted to wear spurs; a lady's
horse should be guided wholly by the whip and reins,--as will be
explained hereafter,--and in no case whatever should the spur be used.
If the lady wishes to keep her horse in good health and temper she must
insist upon his being exercised regularly, and must assure herself that
the groom executes her orders faithfully; for some men, while professing
to obey, have been known to stop at the nearest public house, and, after
spending an hour or two in drinking beer and gossiping with
acquaintances, to ride back complacently to the stable, leaving the
horse to suffer from want of exercise. Other grooms have gone to the
opposite extreme, and have ridden so hard and fast that the horse on
his return was completely tired out, so that when there was occasion to
use him the same day it was an effort for him to maintain his usual
light gait. Grooms who are always doctoring a horse, giving him nostrums
that do no good but often much harm, are also to be avoided. In short,
the owner of a horse must be prepared for tricks of all kinds on the
part of these stable servants; although, in justice to them, it must be
said that there are many who endeavor to perform all their duties
faithfully, and can be relied on to treat with kindness any animals
committed to their care.

Should the lady rider be obliged to get her horse from a livery stable,
she should not rely entirely upon what his owner says of his gaits or
gentleness, but should have him tried carefully by some friend or
servant, before herself attempting to mount him. She should also be very
careful to see, or have her escort see, that the saddle is properly
placed upon the back of the horse and firmly girthed, so that there may
be no danger of its turning.




CHAPTER II.

THE RIDING HABIT.

    "Her dress, her shape, her matchless grace,
    Were all observed, as well as heavenly face."

                                         DRYDEN.


A riding habit should be distinguished by its perfect simplicity. All
attempts at display, such as feathers, ribbons, glaring gilt buttons,
and sparkling jet, should be carefully avoided, and the dress should be
noticeable only for the fineness of its material and the elegance of its
fit.

One of the first requirements in a riding dress is that it should fit
smoothly and easily. The sleeves should be rather loose, especially near
the arm-holes, so that the arms may move freely; but should fit closely
enough at the wrist to allow long gauntlet gloves to pass readily over
them. It is essential that ample room should be allowed across the
chest, as the shoulders are thrown somewhat back in riding, and the
chest is, consequently, expanded. The neck of the dress should fit very
easily, especially at the back part. Care must be taken not to make the
waist too long, for, owing to a lady's position in the saddle, the
movements of her horse will soon make a long waist wrinkle and look
inelegant. To secure ease, together with a perfect fit without crease or
fold, will be somewhat difficult, but not impossible. Some tailors,
particularly in New York, Philadelphia, London, and Paris, make a
specialty of ladies' riding costumes, and can generally be relied on to
supply comfortable and elegant habits.

The favorite and most appropriate style of =riding jacket= is the
"postilion basque;" this should be cut short over the hips, and is then
especially becoming to a plump person, as it diminishes the apparent
width of the back below the waist. The front should have two small
darts, and should extend about three inches below the waist; it should
then slope gradually up to the hips,--where it must be shortest,--and
then downward so as to form a short, square coat-flap at the back, below
the waist. This flap must be made without gathers or plaits, and lined
with silk, between which and the cloth some stiffening material should
be inserted. The middle seam of the coat-flap should be left open as far
as the waist, where about one inch of it must be lapped over from left
to right; the short side-form on each side must be lapped a little
toward the central unclosed seam. The arm-holes should be cut rather
high on the shoulders, so that the back may look less broad. If the lady
lacks plumpness and roundness, her jacket must be made double-breasted,
or else have padding placed across the bust, for a hollow chest mars all
the beauty of the figure in the saddle, and causes the rider to look
round-shouldered. The edge of the basque should be trimmed with
cord-braid, and the front fastened with crocheted bullet buttons;
similar buttons should be used to fasten the sleeves closely at the
wrist, and two more should be placed on the back of the basque just at
its waist line.

Great care must be taken to have the jacket well lined and its seams
strongly sewed. The coat-flaps on the back of the basque, below the
waist-line, should be held down by heavy metallic buttons, sewed
underneath each flap at its lower part, and covered with the same
material as that of the dress. Without these weights this part of the
dress will be apt to be blown out of position by every passing breeze,
and will bob up and down with every motion of the rider's body,
presenting a most ridiculous appearance.

For winter riding an extra jacket may be worn over the riding basque. It
should be made of some heavy, warm material, and fit half tightly. If
trimmed with good fur, this jacket makes a very handsome addition to the
riding habit.

Poets have expatiated upon the grace and beauty of the long, flowing
riding skirt, with its ample folds, but experience has taught that this
long skirt, though, perhaps, very poetical, is practically not only
inconvenient but positively dangerous. In the canter or gallop the horse
is very apt to entangle his hind-foot in it and be thrown, when the
rider may consider herself fortunate if she escapes with no worse
accident than a torn skirt. Another objection to this poetical skirt is,
that it gathers up the mud and dust of the road, and soon presents a
most untidy appearance; while if the day be fresh and breezy its ample
folds will stream out like a victorious banner; if made of some light
material the breeze will swell it out like an inflated balloon; and if
of heavy cloth its length will envelop the rider's feet, and make her
look as if tied in a bag.

To avoid all these dangers and inconveniences the =riding skirt= should
be cut rather short and narrow, and be made of some heavy material. Two
yards and a quarter will be quite wide enough for the bottom of the
skirt, while the length need be only about twelve inches more than the
rider's ordinary dress. The skirt should be so gored as to form no
gathers or plaits at the waist. Tailor-made skirts are so neatly gored
as to remain perfectly smooth when the rider is seated in the saddle. As
the pommels take up a good deal of room, the front part of the skirt,
which passes over them, should be made a little longer than the back, so
that, when the rider is seated in the saddle, her dress may hang evenly.
If made the same length all around it will, when the lady is mounted, be
entirely too short in front, and, besides presenting an uneven,
trail-like appearance, will be apt to work back, or to blow up and
expose the right foot of the wearer.

The bottom of the skirt should have a hem about three inches wide, but
should never be faced with leather, as this will give a stiff, bungling
effect, and if the rider should be thrown, and catch the hem of her
skirt on either pommel or stirrup, the strength of the leather lining
would prevent the cloth from tearing and thus releasing her. Shot,
pieces of lead, or other hard substances are also objectionable, because
by striking against the horse's side they often cause him to become
restless or even to run away. To keep the skirt down in its proper
position a loop of stout elastic, or tape, should be fastened
underneath, near the bottom, and through this loop the foot should be
passed before being put into the stirrup. The point where the loop
should be fastened must be determined by the position of the lady's foot
when she is correctly seated in the saddle. Some riders use a second
elastic for the right foot, to prevent the skirt from slipping back, but
this is not absolutely necessary.

The basque and skirt should be made separate, although it is a very good
plan to have strong hooks and eyes to fasten them together at the sides
and back, as this will prevent the skirt from turning, or slipping down
below the waist, should the binding be a little too loose. The
placket-hole should be on the left side and should be buttoned over, to
prevent it from gaping open; it must be only just large enough to allow
the skirt to slip readily over the shoulders.

The best material for a riding habit is broadcloth, or any strong, soft
fabric that will adapt itself readily to the figure. The color is, of
course, a matter of taste. Black is always stylish, and is particularly
becoming to a stout person. Dark blue, hunter's green, and dark brown
are also becoming colors, especially for slender, youthful figures. In
the country, a linen jacket may be worn in warm weather, and will be
found a very agreeable substitute for the cloth basque, but the skirt
should never be made of so thin a material, as it will be too light to
hang well and too slippery to sit upon.

To secure ease and freedom in the saddle, a garment closely resembling a
pair of =pantaloons= will have to be worn under the riding skirt, and be
fastened down securely by means of strong leather or rubber straps,
which pass under the foot and are buttoned to the bottom of the
pantaloons. These pantaloons should be made of some soft cloth the color
of the dress, or else of chamois skin, faced up to the knee with cloth
like that of the skirt. Most people prefer the chamois skin for winter
use, as it is very warm and so soft that it prevents much of the chafing
usually occasioned by the rubbing of the right leg on the pommel.

No under =petticoats= are necessary where the pantaloons are used, but
if the rider wear one, it should be of some dark color that will not
attract attention if the riding skirt be blown back. Black silk will be
an excellent material for such a skirt in summer, something warmer being
used in winter. This skirt should have no folds or gathers in it, but if
the rider be very thin a little padding around the hips and over the
back will give her the desired effect of plumpness.

An important article of every-day wear will have to be discarded and a
=riding-habit shirt= used in its place. This shirt must be made short,
that the rider may not have to sit upon its folds and wrinkles, which
she would find very uncomfortable. The collar should be high and
standing, _à la militaire_, and made of the finest, whitest linen; it
should be sewed to the shirt for greater security, and should just be
seen above the high collar band of the basque.

The =drawers= must also be made very much like those of a gentleman, and
the lower parts be tucked under the hose. The garters should be rather
loose, or elastic.

Buttoned boots, or those with elastic sides, should not be worn when
riding. For summer use, the shoe laced at the side, and having a low,
broad heel, is liked by many. The ladies' Wellington boot, reaching
nearly to the knee, is also a favorite with some, and, when made without
any seam in front, prevents the stirrup-iron from chafing the instep. To
be comfortable, it should have a broad sole and be made a little longer
than the foot. This boot, however, gives the wearer rather an Amazonian
appearance, and has also the great disadvantage of being very difficult
to get off, the lady usually being obliged to appropriate the
gentleman's bootjack for the purpose. The =best boot= for riding
purposes, found to be the most comfortable, and one easy to get on and
off, is made of some light leather, or kid, for summer use, and of
heavier leather for winter; it extends half way to the knee, laces up in
front, has broad, low heels and wide soles, and is made a little longer
than the wearer's foot, so that it may be perfectly easy, as a tight
boot in riding is even more distressing than in walking.

The =corset= is indispensable to the elegant fit required in a riding
habit, but should never be laced tight. It should be short on the sides
and in the front and back. If long in front it will be almost impossible
for the rider to pass her knee over the second pommel when she attempts
to mount her horse, and will cause her, when riding, to incline her body
too far back; when long at the sides it will be even more inconvenient,
for, if at all tight, it will make the rider, when in the saddle, feel
as if her hips were compressed in a vise; when too long behind, it will
interfere with that curving or hollowing in of the back that is so
necessary to an erect position; it will also tend to throw the body too
far forward. If the rider have any tendency to stoutness all these
discomforts will be exaggerated. The C. P. or the Parisian _la Sirene_
is undoubtedly the best corset for riding purposes, for it is short,
light, and flexible, and not prejudicial to the ease and elegance of
good riding, as is the case with the stiff, long-bodied corset.

The =hair= should be so arranged that it cannot possibly come down
during the ride. To effect this, it must be made into one long braid,
which must be coiled upon the back of the head, and fastened firmly, but
not too tightly, by means of a few long hairpins. The coil may be put on
the top of the head, but this arrangement will be found very
inconvenient, especially where the hair is thick, for it will make the
hat sit very awkwardly on the head. The hair should never be worn in
ringlets, as these will be blown about by the wind, or by the movements
of the rider, and will soon become so tangled as to look like anything
but the "smooth flowing ringlets" of the poet. Nor should the hair be
allowed to stream down the back in long peasant-braids, a style
mistakenly adopted by some young misses, but which gives the rider a
wild and untidy appearance. When the horse is in motion these braids
will stream out on the breeze, and an observer at a short distance will
be puzzled to know what it is that seems to be in such an extraordinary
state of agitation. It is also a mistake to draw the hair back tightly
from the forehead, as this gives a constrained look to the features; it
should, on the contrary, be arranged in rather a loose, unstudied
manner, which will tend to soften the expression of the face. It is the
extreme of bad taste to bang or frizz the hair across the forehead, or
to wear the hat somewhat on the back of the head. These things are
sometimes done by very young girls, but give to the prettiest and most
modest face an air of boldness and vulgarity.

The =riding hat= at present fashionable, and most suitable for city or
park, is made of black silk plush with a Stanley curved brim, and
bell-crown, and is trimmed with a narrow band around the crown, directly
above the brim. Another favorite is a jockey-cap, made of the same cloth
as that of the habit. Either of these may be obtained at the hat stores.
For riding in the country, where one does not care to be so dressy, the
English Derby, or some other fashionable style of young gentleman's felt
hat, may be used; with a short plume or bird's wing fastened at the
side, a hat of this description has a very charming and coquettish air.
There is another style of silk hat manufactured expressly for ladies,
which may also be obtained at any hatter's; it has a lower crown than a
gentleman's silk hat, and looks very pretty with a short black net-veil
fastened around the crown, as this relieves the stiff look it otherwise
presents. This style of hat is very appropriate for a middle-aged
person. Care must be taken to have the hat neither too loose nor too
tight; if too tight, it will be apt to occasion a headache, and if too
loose will be easily displaced.

Long veils, long plumes, hats with very broad brims, or very high
crowns, as well as those which are worn perched on the top of the head,
should be especially avoided. The hat must always be made secure on the
head by means of stout elastic sewn on strongly, and so adjusted that it
can pass below the braid or coil of hair at the back of the head. An
ordinary back-comb firmly fastened on the top of the head will prevent
the hat from gradually slipping backwards.

These apparently trifling details must be attended to, or some prankish
breeze will suddenly carry off the rider's hat, and she will be
subjected to the mortification of having it handed back to her, with an
ill-concealed smile, by some obliging pedestrian. Many little
particulars which seem insignificant when in the dressing-room will
become causes of much discomfort and suffering when in the saddle. The
pleasure of many a ride has been marred by a displaced pin, a lost
button, too tight a garter, a glove that cramped the hand, or a ring
that occasioned swelling and pain in the finger. These details,
unimportant as they may seem, must be carefully attended to before
starting for a ride. Pins should be used sparingly. If a watch is worn,
it should be well secured in its pocket, and the chain carefully
fastened to a button of the jacket.

The =riding gauntlets= should be made of thick, soft, undressed kid, or
chamois skin, be long wristed, and somewhat loose across the hands, so
that the reins may be firmly grasped. With the exception of the watch,
the chain of which should be as unostentatious as possible, it will not
be in good taste to wear jewelry. A cravat or small bow of ribbon will
be in much better taste than a breast-pin for fastening the collar, and
may be of any color that suits the fancy or complexion of the wearer.
The costume may be much brightened by a small _boutonnière_ of natural
flowers; these placed at the throat or waist in an apparently careless
manner give an air of daintiness and refinement to the whole costume.

There is one accomplishment often neglected, or overlooked, even by the
most skillful lady riders, and that is, expertness in =holding the
riding skirt= easily and gracefully when not in the saddle. In this
attainment the Parisian horsewoman far excels all others; her manner of
gathering up the folds of her riding skirt, while waiting for her horse,
forms a picture of such unaffected elegance, that it would be well for
other riders to study and imitate it. She does not grab her skirt with
one hand, twist it round to one side, allow it to trail upon the ground,
nor does she collect the folds in one unwieldy bunch and throw it
brusquely over her arm. Instead of any of these ungraceful acts, she
quietly extends her arms down to their full length at her sides,
inclines her body slightly forward, and gathers up the front of her
skirt, raising her hands just far enough to allow the long part in front
and at the sides to escape the ground; then by bringing her hands
slightly forward, one being held a little higher than the other, the
back part of the skirt is raised. While accomplishing these movements
her whip will be held carelessly in her right hand, at a very short
distance below the handle, the point being directed downwards, and
somewhat obliquely backwards. The whole of this graceful manoeuvring
will be effected readily and artlessly, in an apparently unstudied
manner. In reality, however, all the Parisian's ease and grace are the
results of careful training, but so perfect is the instruction that art
is made to appear like nature.

In selecting a =riding whip= care should be taken to secure one that is
straight and stiff; if it be curved, it may accidentally touch the horse
and make him restless; if flexible it will be of no use in managing him.
The handle of the whip may be very plain, or the lady may indulge her
taste for the ornamental by having it very elaborate and rich, but she
should be careful never to sacrifice strength to appearances. Any
projecting points that might catch on the dress and tear it must be
dispensed with. That the whip may not be lost if the hand should
unwittingly lose its hold upon it, a loop of silk cord should be
fastened firmly to the handle, and the hand passed through this loop.
When riding, the whip should always be held in the right hand with a
grasp sufficient to retain it, but not as if in a vise; the point should
be directed downward, or toward the hind-leg of the horse, care being
taken not to touch him with it except when necessary.




CHAPTER III.

THE SADDLE AND BRIDLE.

    "Form by mild bits his mouth, nor harshly wound,
    Till summer rolls her fourth-revolving round.
    Then wheel in graceful orbs his paced career,
    Let step by step in cadence strike the ear,
    The flexile limbs in curves alternate prance,
    And seem to labor as they slow advance:
    Then give, uncheck'd, to fly with loosen'd rein,
    Challenge the winds, and wing th' unprinted plain."

                      VIRGIL, _Sotheby's Translation_.


In ye ancient times, the damsel who wished to enjoy horseback riding did
not, like her successor of to-day, trust to her own ability to ride and
manage her horse, but, seated upon a pad or cushion, called a "pillion,"
which was fastened behind a man's saddle, rode without a stirrup and
without troubling herself with the reins, preserving her balance by
holding to the belt of a trusty page, or masculine admirer, whose duty
it was to attend to the management of the horse. We learn that as late
as A. D. 1700, George III. made his entry into London with his wife,
Charlotte, thus seated behind him. Gradually, however, as women became
more confident, they rode alone upon a sort of side-saddle, on which by
means of the reins and by bracing her feet against a board, called a
"planchette," which was fastened to the front of the saddle, the rider
managed to keep her seat. Such was the English horsewoman of the
seventeenth century, in the time of Charles II.,--"the height of fashion
and the cream of style."

To the much quoted "vanity of the fair sex" do we owe the invention of
the side-saddle of our grandmothers. About the middle of the sixteenth
century Catherine de Medici, wife of Henry II. of France, having a very
symmetrical figure which she wished to display to advantage, invented
the second pommel of the saddle, and thus, while gratifying her own
vanity, was unconsciously the means of greatly benefiting her sex by
enabling them to ride with more ease and freedom. To this saddle there
was added, about 1830, a third pommel, the invention of which is due to
the late M. Pellier, Sr., an eminent riding teacher in Paris, France.
This three-pommeled saddle is now called the =English saddle=, and is
the one generally used by the best lady riders of the present day.

This so-called "English saddle" was promptly appreciated, and wherever
introduced soon supplanted the old-fashioned one with only two pommels.
(Fig. 7.)

[Illustration: Fig. 7.--English Saddle.

1, second pommel; 2, third pommel; 3, shield; 4, saddle-flap; 5, cantle;
6, stirrup-leather; 7, stirrup; 8, girths; 9, platform.]

A lady who has once ridden one of these three-pommeled saddles will
never care to use any other kind. It renders horseback riding almost
perfectly safe, for, if the rider has learned to use it properly, it
will be nearly impossible for a horse to throw her. It gives her a much
firmer seat even than that of a gentleman in his saddle, and at the same
time, if rightly used, does not interfere with that easy grace so
essential to good riding. In many of our large cities where this saddle
is employed twenty lady riders may now be seen in the park or on the
road where formerly there was one; and this is wholly due to the sense
of security it gives, especially to a timid rider, a feeling never
attainable in the two-pommeled saddle, where the seat is maintained
chiefly by the balance, or by using the reins as a means of support.

By sitting erect, taking a firm hold upon the second pommel with the
right knee, and pressing the left knee up against the third pommel, a
perfectly secure seat is obtained, from which the rider cannot be
shaken, provided the saddle is well girthed and the horse does not fall,
while her hands are left free to manage the reins, a very important
point where the horse is spirited or restless. To insure the greatest
safety and comfort for both horse and rider, it is very important that
the saddle should be accurately constructed. If possible, it should be
made especially for the horse that is to carry it, so that it may suit
his particular shape. If it does not fit him well, it will be likely to
turn, or may gall his back severely, and make him for a long time unfit
for service. It may even, in time, give rise to fistulous withers, will
certainly make the horse restless and uneasy on the road, and the pain
he suffers will interfere with the ease and harmony of his gaits. Many a
horse has been rendered unfit for a lady's use solely because the saddle
did not fit well.

The under surface of the arch of the saddle-tree, in front, should never
come in contact with the animal's withers, nor should the points of the
saddle-tree be so tightly fitted as to interfere with the movements of
his shoulders. On the other hand, they should not be so far apart as to
allow the central furrowed line of the under surface of the saddle (the
chamber) to rest upon the animal's back. The saddle should be so fitted
and padded that this central chamber will lie directly over the spinal
column of the horse without touching it, while the padded surfaces, just
below the chamber, should rest closely on the sides of the back, and be
supported at as many points as is possible without making the animal
uncomfortable.

When a horse has very high withers, a breast-plate, similar to that
employed in military service, may be used, to prevent the saddle from
slipping backwards. This contrivance consists of a piece of leather
passing round the neck like a collar, to the lowest part of which is
fastened a strap that passes between the fore-legs of the horse and is
attached to the saddle girth. Two other straps, one on each side,
connect the upper part of the collar piece with the upper part of the
saddle. The under strap should never be very loose, for should the
saddle slip back and this strap not be tight enough to hold down the
collar piece, the latter will be pulled up by the upper straps so as to
press against the windpipe of the horse and choke him. Should the horse
have low withers and a round, barrel-like body, false pannels or padded
pieces may be used; but an animal of this shape is not suitable for a
lady, for it will be almost impossible to keep the saddle from turning,
no matter how carefully it may be girthed.

A sufficiently spacious seat or platform to the saddle is much more
comfortable for both horse and rider than a narrow one. It gives the
rider a firmer seat, and does not bring so much strain upon the girths.
This platform should also be made as nearly level as possible, and be
covered with quilted buckskin. Leather, now so often used for this
purpose, becomes after a time so slippery that it is difficult to retain
one's seat, and the pommels when covered with it are apt to chafe the
limbs severely.

To secure a thoroughly comfortable saddle it is necessary that not only
the horse, but also the rider, should be measured for it; for a saddle
suitable for a slender person could hardly be used with any comfort by a
stout one, and it is almost as bad to have a saddle too large as too
small. Care must be taken to have sufficient length from the front of
the second pommel to the cantle. In the ready-made saddles this distance
is usually too short, and the rider is obliged to sit upon the back edge
of the seat, thereby injuring both herself and her horse. It is much
better to err in the other direction and have the seat too long rather
than too short. The third pommel should be so placed that it will just
span the knee when the stirrup-leather is of the right length. It should
be rather short, slightly curved, and blunt. If it be too long and have
too much of a curve, it will, in the English trot, interfere with the
free action of the rider's left leg, and if the horse should fall, it
would be almost impossible for her to disengage her leg and free herself
in time to escape injury. The third pommel must be so placed as not to
interfere with the position of the right leg when this is placed around
the second pommel with the right heel drawn backwards. To get the proper
proportions for her saddle, the lady must, when seated, take her measure
from the under side of the knee joint to the lower extremity of her
back, and also--to secure the proper width for the seat--from thigh to
thigh. If these two measurements are given to the saddle-maker he will,
if he understands his business, be able to construct the saddle
properly.

The saddle recommended by the author, one which she has used for several
years, and still continues to use, is represented in Fig. 7. The third
pommel of this saddle is of medium size, and instead of being close to
the second one is placed a short distance below it, thus enabling the
rider to use a longer stirrup than she otherwise could; for if the two
pommels be very close together, the rider will be obliged to use a very
short stirrup in order to make this third pommel of any use. The
disadvantage of a short stirrup is that, in a long ride, it is apt to
occasion cramp in the left leg. It also interferes with an easy and
steady position in the saddle. But with a stirrup of the right length,
and the arrangement of the pommels such as we have described, a
steadiness is given to the left leg that can never be obtained with the
old-fashioned two-pommeled saddle.

The third pommel must be screwed securely into the saddle-tree, and once
fixed in its proper place, should not again be moved, as if frequently
turned it will soon get loose, and the rider will not be able to rely
upon its assistance to retain her balance. It should be screwed into
place inversely, that is, instead of being turned to the right it must
be turned to the left, so that the pressure of the knee may make it
firmer and more secure, instead of loosening it, as would be the case if
it were screwed to the right. This pommel should be well padded, so that
the knee may not be bruised by it.

The second pommel should also be well padded, and should always be
curved slightly so as to suit the form of the right leg. It must not be
so high as to render it difficult, in mounting and dismounting, to pass
the right knee over it. The off-pommel, since the English saddle has
come into vogue, has almost disappeared, being reduced to a mere vestige
of its former size. This is a great improvement to the rider's
appearance, as she now no longer has that confined, cribbed-up look
which the high pommeled saddle of twenty years ago gave her.

The distance between the off-pommel and the second one should be adapted
to the size of the rider's leg, being wide enough to allow the leg to
rest easily between the two; but no wider than this, as too much space
will be apt to lead her to sit sideways upon the saddle.

A saddle should be well padded, but not so much so as to lift the rider
too high above the horse's back. The shield in front should not press
upon the neck of the horse, but should barely touch it. The saddle flaps
must be well strapped down, for if they stand out stiffly, the correct
position of the stirrup leg will be interfered with. A side-saddle
should never be too light in weight, for this will make the back of the
horse sore, especially if he be ridden by a heavy woman.

The tacks or nails in the under part of the saddle should be firmly
driven in, as they may otherwise become loose and either injure the
horse, or make him nervous and uneasy. To avoid trouble of this kind,
some people advocate the use of false pannels, which are fastened to the
saddle-tree by rods or loops, and can be removed and replaced at will.
It is said that by using them, the same saddle can be made to fit
different horses. The author has no personal knowledge of this
invention, but it has been strongly recommended to her by several
excellent horsemen. A felt or flannel saddle cloth, of the same color as
the rider's habit, should always be placed under the saddle, as it helps
to protect the horse's back, as well as to prevent the saddle from
getting soiled.

Every finished side-saddle has three girths. Two of these are made of
felt cloth, or strong webbing, and are designed to fasten it firmly upon
the horse's back. The third one, made of leather, is intended to keep
the flaps down. There should always be, on each side, three straps
fastened to the saddle-tree under the leather flaps; upon two of these
the girths are to be buckled, while the third is an extra one, to be
used as a substitute in case of any accident to either of the others.
Between the outside leather flaps and the horse's body there should be
an under flap of flannel or cloth, which should be well padded on the
side next the horse, because, when tightly girthed, the girth-buckles
press directly upon the outside of this flap, and if its padding be
thin, or worn, the animal will suffer great pain. This is a cause of
restlessness which is seldom noticed, and many a horse has been thought
to be bad tempered when he was only wild with pain from the pressure of
the girth-buckles against his side.

[Illustration: Fig. 8.--Stokes' mode of girthing the saddle.]

The credit of introducing a new method of tightening girths belongs, so
far as we know, to Mr. Stokes, formerly a riding-teacher in Cincinnati.
This method enables one to girth the horse tightly, without using so
much muscular effort as is usually required, so that by its means, a
lady can, if she wish, saddle her own horse. (Fig. 8.)

The following is a description of Mr. Stokes' manner of girthing: At the
end of each of the leather girth straps, which hang down between the
flaps on the off-side of the saddle, is fastened a strong iron buckle
without any tongue, but with a thin steel roller or revolving cylinder
on its lower edge. On the near side of the saddle the girths are
strapped in the usual manner, but, on the _outer_ end of each cloth
girth there is, in addition to an ordinary buckle, with a roller on the
upper side of it, a long strap, which is fastened to the under side of
the girth, the buckle being on the upper side. This strap, when the
saddle is girthed, is passed up through the tongueless buckle, moving
easily over the steel roller, and is then brought down to the buckle
with tongue on the end of the girth, and there fastened in the usual
manner.

The slipper stirrup, when first introduced, was a great favorite, for in
addition to furnishing an excellent support, it was believed that it
would release the foot instantly should the rider be thrown. This latter
merit, however, it was found that it did not possess, as many severe
accidents occurred where this stirrup was used, especially with the
two-pommeled saddle. Instead of releasing the rider in these cases, as
it was supposed it would, the stirrup tilted up and held her foot so
firmly grasped that she was dragged some distance before she could be
released. This stirrup, therefore, gradually fell into disfavor, and is
now no longer used by the best riders.

[Illustration: Fig. 9.--Victoria stirrup.]

There are, at the present time, three kinds of stirrups which are
favorites among finished riders. The first is called the "Victoria"
because it is the one used by the Queen of England. (Fig. 9.) In this
stirrup the platform on which the foot rests is broad and comfortable,
and is slightly roughened to prevent the foot from slipping. A
spring-bar attachment (Fig. 10) is placed at the top of the
stirrup-leather under the saddle-flap, and at the end of this bar there
is a spring, so that, if the rider be thrown, the stirrup-leather
becomes instantly detached from the saddle.

[Illustration: Fig. 10.--Spring-bar for stirrup leather.]

The second variety of stirrup, known as "Lennan's safety stirrup," has
all the merit of the preceding one. If kept well oiled and free from
mud, it will release the foot at once, when an accident occurs. It may,
if desired, be accompanied by the spring-bar attachment, and thus
rendered doubly secure. (Fig. 11.) Some people, however, dislike the
spring-bar attachment, and prefer to rely entirely upon the spring of
the stirrup to release the foot.

[Illustration: Fig. 11.--Lennan's safety stirrup.]

The third stirrup, called "Latchford's safety stirrup," consists of a
stirrup within a stirrup, and is so arranged that, when a rider is
thrown, the inner stirrup springs open and releases the foot. (Fig. 12.)
Either of these stirrups can be procured in London, England, or from the
best saddle-makers in this country.

[Illustration: Fig. 12.--Latchford's safety stirrup.]

A =stirrup-iron= should never be made of cast metal, but invariably of
the best wrought steel: it should be adapted to the size of the rider's
foot, and should, if possible, have an instep pad at the top, while the
bottom platform, upon which the foot rests, should be broad, and
roughened on its upper surface.

The =stirrup-leather= should be of the very best material, and should
have neither fissures nor cracks in any part of it. It is very important
to examine this leather frequently, and see that it is neither wearing
thin, nor breaking at its upper part at the bar, nor at the lower part
where it is fastened to the stirrup.

A novel arrangement of the stirrup-leather, by means of the so-called
"balance-strap," has of late years been used by some riders. The stirrup
is, in this case, fastened to the balance-strap, which consists of a
single strap passing up through the ring-bar, and then brought down to
within two or three inches of the lower edge of the saddle-flap; here it
is passed through a slit in the flap, then carried under the horse to
the other side and buckled to another strap, which is fastened, for this
purpose, just below the off-pommel. By this arrangement the saddle-flaps
on both sides are held down, and the rider, without dismounting, can
change the length of her stirrup by merely tightening or loosening this
strap. Although highly recommended by some riders, this balance strap
has one objectionable feature, which is that, as the measurement of the
horse's girth is not constant during a long ride, it will be necessary
to tighten the strap frequently in order to keep the stirrup of the
proper length. The old way of fastening is much better, for too much
complication in the saddle and bridle is apt to annoy and confuse the
rider, especially if a novice. The =golden rule= in riding on horseback
is to have everything accurate, simple, safe, and made of the very best
material that can be procured.

The =bridle= should be neatly and plainly made, with no large rosettes
at the sides, nor highly colored bands across the forehead. The reins
and the head-piece should never be made of rounded straps, but always
of flat ones, and should be of the best and strongest leather,
especially the reins. These should be carefully examined from time to
time, in order to be sure that there are no imperfections in them. Any
roughness or hardness is an indication of defectiveness, and may be
detected by dexterously passing the fingers to and fro over the flat
surfaces, which should be smooth, soft, and flexible. There can hardly
be too much care taken about this matter, for the snapping of a rein
always alarms a horse; and, feeling himself free from all control, he
will be almost certain to run away, while the rider, if she has no other
reins, will be powerless to protect herself, or to check him in his
purpose.

=Martingales= are rarely used by riders, as they are troublesome, and
can very well be dispensed with, unless the horse has the disagreeable
trick of raising his head suddenly, from time to time, when a martingale
will become necessary in order to correct this fault. The French
martingale is the best. This consists of a single strap, fastened either
to the under part of a nose-band at its centre under the jaw, or by
branches to each side of the snaffle-bit at the corners of the horse's
mouth and then carried between the fore-legs and fastened to the girth.
When the horse raises his head too high this strap pulls upon the
nose-band, compresses his nostrils, interferes with his breathing, and
causes him to lower his head promptly. The horse should not be too much
confined by the martingale, for the object is simply to prevent him from
lifting his head too high, and all other ordinary movements should be
left free.

[Illustration: Fig. 13.--Chifney bit.]

Among the many =bits= which have been used, that known as the "Pelham"
has been highly praised, although, at the present time, it is almost, if
not entirely, out of use. It might, however, from the severity of its
curb prove of service in controlling a hard-mouthed horse, although such
a one should never be ridden by a lady. The Chifney bit is another very
severe one, and is very useful in managing a horse that pulls hard. But
if the animal have a tender mouth, this bit should be used with great
caution, and not at all by an inexperienced rider. (Fig. 13.)

The bit known as the "snaffle," when made plain and not twisted, is the
mildest of all bits, and some horses will move readily only when this
is used, the curb instantly rousing their temper. Others, again, do best
with a combination of the curb and the snaffle, and although the former
may seldom require to be used, its mere presence in the mouth of the
horse will prove a sufficient check to prevent him from running away.
Most horses, however, especially those ridden by ladies, require a light
use of the curb to bring them to their best gait.

[Illustration: Fig. 14.--The Combination Bit.

_a_, _a_, rings fastened on each side to small bar, at right angles to
and directed backward of the cheek; _b_, _b_, rings for the curb-reins.]

The bit used and recommended by many, but not by the author, is a curb
so arranged as to form a combination bit in one piece. It consists of a
curb (Fig. 14), to each side of which, at the angles of the horse's
mouth, a ring is attached, and to each of these rings is fastened a
rein. This gives a second pair of reins and converts the curb into a
kind of snaffle. In this way it answers the purpose of both curb and
snaffle without crowding the horse's mouth with two separate bits.

If two bits should be used--the curb and bridoon--instead of the above
combination bit, the bridoon should be placed in the horse's mouth in
such a way as not to interfere with the action of the curb; it must,
therefore, be neither too thick nor too long, and so fitted into the
angles of the mouth as to neither wrinkle nor draw back the lips.

The bit should always be made of the best steel, be well rounded, and
perfectly smooth. Above all it should be accurately fitted to the
horse's mouth: if it be too narrow it will compress his lips against the
bars of his mouth, and the pain thereby occasioned will render him very
restive. The mouth-piece should be just long enough to have the cheeks
of the bit fit closely to the outer surface of the lips without
compressing them, and must not be so long as to become displaced
obliquely when a rein is pulled.

[Illustration: Fig. 15.--Dwyer's Curb-Bit.

1, 1, upper bars or cheeks; 2, 2, lower bars; 3, the port; 4, 4, the
canons; 5, curb-chain; 6, curb-hook; 7, lip strap and ring; 8, 8, rein
rings; 9, 9, head stall rings.]

According to Major Dwyer, who is a high authority on the subject of
bits,--and whose little work should be carefully studied by all
bit-makers,--it seems to be the general rule to have the lower bar or
cheek of the curb-bit twice as long as the upper one; but, as there is
no standard measure for the upper one the other is frequently made too
long. Major Dwyer states that the mouth-piece, for any horse of ordinary
size, should be one and three fourths inches for the upper bar, and
three and a half inches for the lower one. This makes five and one
fourth inches for the entire length of the two bars, from the point at
which the curb-hook acts above to that where the lower ring acts below.
(Fig. 15.) For ordinary ponies the upper bar may be one and a half
inches, and the lower one three, making a total length of four and a
half inches.

Every lady rider should know that the longer the lower bar, the thinner
the mouth-piece, and the higher the "port," the more severe and painful
will be the action of the bit upon the horse's mouth. For a horse of
ordinary size, the width of the port should be one and one third inches;
for a pony, one inch. The height will vary according to the degree of
severity required.

The curb-chain, for a horse that has a chin-groove of medium size,
should be about four fifths of an inch wide, as a chain that is rather
broad and flat is less painful for the horse than a thin, sharp one. If
the chin-groove be very narrow, a curb-chain of less width will have to
be used, and should be covered with cloth; or, instead of a chain, a
narrow strap of leather may be used, which should be kept soft and
pliable. The proper length for the curb-chain, not including the
curb-hooks, is about one fourth more than the width of the animal's
mouth. The hooks should be exactly alike, and about an inch and a
quarter long.

Some horses are very expert in the trick of catching the cheek of the
bit between their teeth. To remedy this vice a lip-strap may be used;
but it will be found much better to have each cheek or bar bent into the
form of the letter S, remembering, however, that the measurement of the
length, referred to above, must in the case of curved bars be made in a
straight line. Sometimes the upper bar of the curb-bit will, on account
of the peculiar form of the horse's head, press against and gall his
cheeks. When this is noticed, most people change the bit, and get one
with a longer mouth-piece; but where the mouth-piece is of the same
length as the width of the mouth, the proper remedy for this difficulty
will be to have the upper bar bent out enough to free the cheeks from
its pressure.

The curb-bit once made and properly adjusted to the head-stall, the next
step will be to =fit it accurately= to the horse's mouth. Every rider
should thoroughly understand not only how to do this, but also how to
place the saddle correctly upon the horse. Upon these points nearly all
grooms require instruction, and very few gentlemen, even, know how to
arrange a side-saddle so as to have it comfortable for both horse and
rider. Moreover, should the lady be riding alone, as frequently happens
in the country, and meet with any accident to saddle or bridle, or need
to have either adjusted, she would, without knowledge on these subjects,
be completely helpless, whereas with it she could promptly remedy the
difficulty.

[Illustration: Fig. 16.--The Bit adjusted.

1, 1, snaffle-rein; 2, 2, curb-rein.]

In order to adjust the bit permanently to the head-stall, so that
afterwards the horse can always be properly bridled, one must proceed
as follows: having first fitted the head-stall to the horse's head by
means of the upper buckles, the bit must then be adjusted, by means of
the lower ones, in such a manner that the canons of the mouth-piece
will rest on the bars of the horse's mouth, exactly opposite the
chin-groove. (Fig. 16.) Should the tusks of the horse be irregularly
placed, the mouth-piece must be adjusted a little higher than the
projecting tusks, so as to just avoid touching them. The curb-chain
may now be hooked into the ring of the upper bar on the off-side,
leaving one link loose, after which the other hook must be fastened to
the ring of the bar on the near-side, leaving two links loose. Care
should be taken to have the curb-chain rest with its flat surface
against the chin-groove in such a way that it will have no tendency to
rise up when the reins are pulled upon. The curb-chain should never be
tight; there must always be room enough between it and the chin to
insert the first and second fingers of the right hand flatwise; and,
while the fingers are thus placed, if the reins are drawn up, it will
be easy to ascertain whether the chain pinches. If, when the reins are
tightened, the bit stands stiff and immovable, it will show that the
chain is too short and needs to be lengthened a link or two. If the
horse gently yields his head to the tightening of the reins, without
suddenly drawing back, or thrusting out his nose as the tension is
increased, it will prove that the bit is correctly placed. But if the
lower bars of the bit can be drawn back quite a distance before the
horse will yield to the pull of the reins, then the chain is too long,
and should be shortened. "Lightness, accuracy, easy motion, a total
absence of stiffness, constraint, or painful action, are the
characteristics of good bitting; and if these be attained, ready
obedience to the rider's hand will be the result."--_F. Dwyer._

When the bit has once been correctly adjusted to the head-stall and to
the horse's mouth, there will be little difficulty in bridling him upon
any subsequent occasion. Thus: standing at the left of the horse's head,
the head-stall, held by its upper part in the right hand, should be
lifted up in front of the horse's head, while the left hand, holding the
bit by its mouth-piece, should put this between the animal's lips, press
it against his teeth, and into his mouth, which he will generally open
a little in order to admit it. As soon as this has been accomplished,
the upper part of the head-stall must be promptly raised so as to bring
its upper strap or band across the forehead, while at the same time the
horse's ears are passed between the forehead band and the strap which
forms the upper part of the head-stall.

During these manoeuvres, the curb-chain must be passed under the chin,
so as to rest against the chin-groove, and care be taken to keep the
fingers of the left hand out of the horse's mouth while the mouth-piece
is being put in. The bit and head-stall having been properly arranged,
the whole should be secured by buckling the throat-strap loosely on the
left side. If this strap be buckled tightly, the horse will be unable to
bend his neck properly. The mouth-piece of the bit should be washed,
dried, and then rubbed with fresh olive or cotton-seed oil, each time
after use, to preserve it from rust.

Neither a rusted bit nor a very cold one should ever be put into a
horse's mouth. In frosty winter weather the bit should always be warmed.
Many a valuable horse has had his mouth seriously injured by having an
icy cold mouth-piece put into it, to say nothing of the pain and
suffering it must invariably occasion.

In order to produce a neat and pleasing appearance, there should be no
unsightly ends or straps left dangling from the loops of the head-stall.
They should be so snugly fitted into their places that they cannot work
out of their loops.

The forehead band should never be too tight for the horse's comfort, and
the small rosettes that lie over his temples should be well oiled
underneath and kept soft.

A side-saddle may be made accurately according to all recognized rules,
and yet lose nearly all its good effects by being improperly put on; the
rider will be made uncomfortable, the horse's back will be injured, and
the saddle will eventually have its padding so compressed in the wrong
direction that it will be impossible to put it on in the right way.

Every lady rider should know as well how to have her saddle properly
adjusted as how to sit her horse or manage the reins. On a well-formed
horse, with rather high withers and sloping shoulders, the centre of the
saddle should be placed over the middle of the back, and be so arranged
that the front part of the saddle-tree shall be a very short distance
back of the horse's shoulder-blade, for if allowed to rest upon the
shoulder-blade it will interfere very much with the action of the
shoulder muscles. It is a common fault of grooms to place the saddle a
little sideways, and too far forward on the withers. The well-taught
rider can, however, easily decide whether the saddle is in the right
position: standing on the off-side of the horse, she must pass her right
hand under the arch of the saddle-tree, which should be directly over
the withers, and see whether it sits perfectly even, bearing no more to
one side than to the other; then stepping behind the horse, but at a
safe distance from his heels, she can see whether the long central
furrow of the under surface of the saddle-seat from front to rear
(chamber) is in a direct line with the animal's backbone, and forms an
open space over it. If these conditions are fulfilled, the saddle is
properly adjusted. If the horse have rather straight shoulders, together
with a plump, round body, the saddle will require to be placed rather
farther forward, but with the chamber still in a line with the backbone.
On some horses of this shape, the saddle, to be held securely, will need
to be set so far forward that the girths will have to pass close to the
fore-legs. A horse of this description is not suitable for the
side-saddle, but as ladies in the country and in the far West are
sometimes obliged to ride such, it is very important for their safety
to know how these ill-formed animals should be saddled, because should
the saddle be put too far back on such horses, it will be sure to turn.

It not infrequently happens that after the saddle has been placed in the
correct position, it becomes slightly displaced while being fastened. To
avoid this, it should always be girthed on the off-side, and great care
be taken, when fastening the girths, especially the first one, that the
saddle be not jerked over to the left; and that in pulling upon the
short strap on the off-side, to which the girth is to be buckled, the
saddle be not forced to the right.

When girthing the saddle, the lady may place her left hand on the middle
of the seat and hold it steady while she arranges the first girth, and
with her right hand draws it as tightly as she can, without using
violent exertion, or making any sudden jerk; she will then be able, with
both hands, to tighten the girth as much as is necessary, doing this
with an even, regular pull, so that the saddle will not be moved out of
place. Before fastening the other girths, she should step behind the
horse and assure herself that the chamber is in a line with the horse's
backbone, as before described. If it is not, she must loosen the girth,
and, after straightening the saddle, proceed as before. The girth to be
first fastened is the one nearest the horse's fore-legs; the second
girth is the one back of the first, and should be placed evenly over the
first one and fastened equally tight; the third is the leather girth
which is intended to keep down the saddle-flaps; this must be placed
evenly over the other two, but it is not essential to have it drawn so
tight as they, but just enough so to hold the flaps. Most horses have a
trick, when they are being girthed, of expanding their sides and
abdomen, for the purpose of securing a loose girthing; and girths that
seem almost too tight when they are first buckled are often found to be
too loose after the rider has mounted. Too tight a girth is injurious to
the horse, but too loose a one may cause the saddle to turn. A round,
plump horse with low withers will need tighter girthing than a better
shaped one. The lady rider should study the shape of her horse, and use
her own judgment as to how tight the girths should be drawn, making due
allowance for the trick alluded to above. If there is any second person
present while the saddle is being arranged, matters may be facilitated
if this person will hold the saddle firmly by the off-pommel while the
girthing is being done.

The author has been thus particular in describing the bit and saddle
with their proper arrangement, as well as the girthing of the horse,
because so few lady riders bestow any attention upon these very
important matters; and yet, if one desires to ride safely and well, a
knowledge of them is positively necessary. Grooms cannot always be
depended upon, and, indeed, seldom know much about the side-saddle;
there is an adage which is applicable to many of them: "Too much must
not be expected from the head of him who labors only with his hands." In
the instructions given by gentlemen writers, useful as they may be in
many respects, there is usually a good deal of practical information
omitted which a lady rider ought to know, but the necessity of which it
is perhaps impossible for a gentleman fully to appreciate or understand;
this knowledge the lady will have to gain either from her own experience
or from one of her own sex who has studied the subject carefully.

In preparing for horseback riding, nothing should be omitted that can
give greater security to the rider, or protect her more completely from
accident of any sort. Every article should be of the very best material,
so that a breakage or casualty of any kind may be only a remote
possibility. The knowledge that everything is right, and firmly and
properly placed, creates a confidence which adds greatly to the pleasure
of the ride.




CHAPTER IV.

MOUNTING AND DISMOUNTING.

    "'Stand, Bayard, stand!'--the steed obeyed,
    With arching neck and bending head,
    And glancing eye and quivering ear,
    As if he loved _her voice_ to hear."

                     _Lady of the Lake._


A novice in riding always experiences in a greater or less degree a
sense of trepidation and embarrassment when, for the first time, a horse
duly caparisoned for a lady rider is put before her, and she is expected
to seat herself in the saddle. If she be a timid person, the apparent
difficulty of this feat occasions a dismay which the good-natured
champing of the bit and impatient head shakings of the horse do not tend
to diminish. If, however, she be accustomed to horses as pets, and
understand their ways, she will be much less apprehensive about mounting
than the lady who has only observed them at a distance and is entirely
ignorant of their nature. The author has known ladies, after their
horses had been brought to the door, to send them back to the stable
because courage failed them when it became necessary to trust
themselves on the back of an animal of which they knew nothing. To
overcome this timidity the lady must become better acquainted with her
horse, and, to do so, should visit him occasionally in his stable, feed
him with choice morsels, and lead him about the yard from time to time.
By these means a mutual friendship and confidence will be created, and
the lady will gradually gain enough courage to place herself in the
saddle.

The first attempt at mounting should be made from a =high horse-block=
with some one to hold the head of the horse and keep him still. Turning
her right side somewhat toward the horse's left, and slightly raising
the skirt of her riding habit, the lady should spring from her left foot
towards the saddle, at the same time raising her right leg so that it
will pass directly over the second and third pommels. This accomplished,
the left foot may be placed in the stirrup.

Another method of mounting from a rather high horse-block, when the
pommels are high, is for the lady to face the horse's left side, and,
seizing the off-pommel with the right hand and the second one with the
left, to spring towards the saddle from her left foot, and seat herself
sidewise. She can then turn her body so as to face the horse's head,
place her right leg over the second pommel,--adjusting her skirt at the
same time,--and slip her left foot into the stirrup and her left knee
under the third pommel.

Should the =horse-block be low= and the lady short, she will be obliged
to mount somewhat after a man's fashion, thus: Placing her left foot in
the stirrup, and grasping the second pommel with her left hand, she
should spring from her right foot, and, as she rises, grasp the
off-pommel with her right hand; by means of this spring, aided by the
pommels and stirrup, she can seat herself sideways in the saddle,
turning her body for this purpose just before gaining the seat. In the
absence of a horse-block, from which to mount, the assistance of a chair
or stool should never be resorted to unless there is some one to hold it
firm and steady.

When the rider is obliged to =mount= without assistance and =from the
ground=, if the balance-strap, before referred to, be used with her
stirrup, she can let this strap down far enough to enable her to put her
foot in the stirrup easily, and to use it as a sort of stepping-stone by
means of which, and a spring from her right foot, she can reach the
saddle sideways. In doing this she must grasp the second pommel firmly
with her left hand, in which she also should hold her whip and the
reins; on rising she must aid herself by grasping with the right hand
the off-pommel as soon as she can reach it. When she is seated, the
stirrup can be adjusted from the off-side by means of the balance-strap.

If, however, she uses the old-fashioned stirrup-leather, and there is no
assistance of any kind at hand, neither horse-block, chair, nor stool,
not even a fence or steep bank from which to mount,--a situation in
which a rider might possibly be placed,--then reaching the saddle
becomes a very puzzling affair, unless the lady be so active that she
can spring from the ground to her saddle. To try the plan of lengthening
the stirrup-leather will be dangerous, because, in order to readjust it
after mounting, she will have to sit on the back part of the saddle,
bend over the horse's left side, and pull up the stirrup-leather in
order to shorten and buckle it; while in this position, if the horse
should start, she would probably be thrown instantly. Her safest course
would be to lead the horse until a place is found where she can mount.
If she should have to use a fence for this purpose let her be sure that
the posts are firmly fixed in the ground, and that the boards are
neither loose nor easily broken.

When mounting, the whip and reins should be held in the left hand, the
former with the point down, so that it may not hit the horse, and the
latter grasped just tightly enough to feel the horse's mouth without
pulling on it. In order to arrange the folds of the riding skirt after
mounting, the reins and whip must be transferred to the right hand;
then, resting this hand upon the off-pommel, the rider should raise
herself free from the saddle by straightening her left knee and standing
on the stirrup, also aiding herself by means of the right hand on the
pommel. While thus standing she can quickly arrange the skirt with her
left hand.

None of the methods of mounting just described--with the exception of
the first one--are at all graceful, and they should never be used except
in case of absolute necessity. The most graceful way for a lady to reach
the saddle, and the one that is taught in the best riding schools, is by
the =assistance of a gentleman=. The rider's education will not be
complete until she has learned this method of mounting, which, when
accomplished easily and gracefully, is delightful to witness. It should
be learned after the preliminary lessons at the horse-block have been
taken. In using this simple manner of reaching the saddle, the rider
will have three distinct points of support, namely, the shoulder of the
gentleman who assists her, the united palms of his hands, and her own
hold upon the pommel.

[Illustration: Fig. 17.--Lady ready to mount her horse.]

The stirrup having been placed across the shield of the saddle in front
of the pommels, the lady, holding the reins and the whip with its point
down in her right hand,--which must rest upon the second pommel,--should
stand with her right side toward the horse's left, about four or five
inches from it, her left shoulder being slightly turned back. Then,
taking a firm hold upon the second pommel with her right hand, she
should with the left lift her riding skirt enough to enable her to place
her left foot fairly and squarely into the gentleman's palms, which
should be clasped firmly together. This done, she should drop the skirt,
place her left hand upon his right shoulder, bend her knee, or give the
word "ready," as a signal, and at once spring from her right foot up and
a little towards the horse. The gentleman, at the same moment, must
raise his hands, and move them toward the horse. The lady must, when
rising, press or bear lightly upon his shoulder, and also keep a firm
hold upon the second pommel, which she must not relinquish until she is
seated. If correctly performed, this manoeuvre will place the rider in
the saddle sideways. The gentleman should then remove the stirrup from
the front of the saddle, while the lady transfers the reins to her left
hand, passes her right knee over the second pommel and her left under
the third. She will then be ready to have her foot placed in the
stirrup. (Fig. 17.)

It will, however, be found very difficult to mount in this manner,
gracefully, unless the gentleman who assists thoroughly understands his
duties; should he be awkward about helping her, the lady will find it
much better to depend upon the horse-block. If, for instance, he should
raise his hands too high, or with too much energy, when she makes her
spring, he may push her too far over, or even--if she should loosen her
grasp of the second pommel,--cause her to fall from the off-side of the
horse. This is a dangerous accident, and almost certain to occasion
severe injuries. On the other hand, if he does not use energy enough, or
neglects to carry his hands toward the body of the horse as the lady
rises, she may not reach the saddle at all, and will he apt to fall to
the ground on the left side of the horse, especially if she relinquishes
her hold on the second pommel. The gentleman must also be careful not to
let his foot rest on the lady's skirt, as this will pull her back, and
perhaps tear the dress, as she makes her spring.

In assisting a lady to mount, the =gentleman= should first arrange the
snaffle-reins evenly and of the proper length, and place them in her
right hand, leaving the curb-reins to lie loosely on the neck of the
horse. Then, after putting the stirrup out of the way, as described
above, he should take a position facing her, with his left shoulder
toward the left shoulder of the horse. Clasping his hands together with
the palms turned up, he should stoop sufficiently to enable her to put
her left foot upon them, and, in raising them as she springs, he must
gradually assume the erect posture. When the lady is seated, he should
return the stirrup to its proper position and place her foot in it,
after first, with his left hand, adjusting her skirt so that it will
fall evenly; he should then place the curb-reins in her left hand, with
the others. No gentleman is a finished equestrian, nor a desirable
companion for a lady on horseback, who does not know how to assist her
dexterously and gracefully to mount and dismount.

A lady who is not very nimble in her movements, or who is very heavy,
should be extremely careful in mounting not to accept assistance from a
gentleman who is not strong enough to support her weight easily and
firmly. It will be much better for her to use a horse-block or something
of the kind. But if she does accept the aid of a gentleman, the
following changes in the methods described above have been recommended:
instead of facing her, he should stand close to her side, with his face
turned in the same direction as hers: she should then place her left
foot in his united hands, and in order to do so must pass her left leg
between his right arm and his body. He will thus be enabled to support
and lift her with greater ease, and, as she rises, her left leg will
readily escape from under his right arm, and she will be able to seat
herself sideways in the saddle, as by the former method. During this
manoeuvre she must sustain herself by the second pommel, as in the
preceding instance.

If a horse is restless and uneasy when being mounted, he should be held
by a third person, who must stand in front of his head and take a firm
hold of the curb-bit on each side, but without touching the reins, which
should always be held and managed by the rider only. It is _always_ a
better plan, when mounting, to have the horse held, although a
well-trained horse will stand quietly without such control.

Mounting is a part of the rider's education which should be carefully
studied and practiced, for when properly and gracefully accomplished it
is the very poetry of motion, and will enable her to display more
pliancy and lightness than she can even in the ball-room. There is
another branch of the rider's education which also requires careful
study, as it is rarely accomplished satisfactorily, and is apt to
occasion as much embarrassment and dismay to a beginner as mounting.
This is =dismounting=. To alight from a horse easily and well, without
disarranging the dress, and without being awkwardly precipitated into
the arms of the gentleman who assists, is by no means an easy task, and
very few lady riders accomplish it with skill and address.

When assisting his companion from the saddle, the gentleman should stand
about a foot from her with his face toward the horse, while she, after
taking her foot from the stirrup and disengaging her right leg from the
pommel, must turn her body so as to face him. After putting the stirrup
over the shield of the saddle, as in mounting, he should then extend his
hands so as to support her by the elbows, while she rests a hand upon
each of his shoulders. Then, by giving a gentle spring, she will glide
lightly to the ground, he meanwhile supporting her with his hands, and,
as she descends, bending his body, and moving his right side slightly
backward. She can also assist him to lessen the shock as she touches the
ground by bending her knees a little, as if courtesying.

Another way of assisting the lady, especially if she be rather stout and
not very active, is for the gentleman to clasp her waist with both
hands, instead of holding her by the elbows. He should, in this case,
stand as far from her as he can while still supporting her, and, as she
descends, should make a step backward with his right foot, and turn a
little away from the horse, which should be held by a third person, in
the manner described before, in mounting.

[Illustration: Fig. 18.--Lady ready to dismount.]

Another, and more graceful way of dismounting is the following: The
gentleman, standing about a foot from his companion and directly facing
her, takes in his left hand her bridle,--as near as he can to the
horse's mouth, that he may hold him as firmly and securely as
possible,--the lady now drops the reins on the horse's neck, disengages
her foot from the stirrup, and her leg from the second pommel, and then
seats herself sideways in the saddle, so as to face her assistant, who
now places the stirrup on the front of the saddle with his right hand;
he then offers his right shoulder to the lady for her support. She,
after gathering up in her left hand a few folds of her riding skirt, in
order to have her feet free when she alights, places upon his shoulder
the hand which holds the skirt, and with the other, in which she holds
her whip point downward, grasps the second pommel and springs lightly
from the saddle, the gentleman bending over a little as she descends. On
reaching the ground, she should, as before described, bend her knees
slightly to lessen the shock of the descent. (Fig. 18.)

In all these modes of dismounting, the lady, before attempting to
alight, should be sure that her skirt is quite free from the pommels,
especially from the second one, and that it is so adjusted that it will
not be trodden upon when she reaches the ground, but will fall evenly
about her, without being in any way disarranged.

It happens not infrequently that a lady is obliged to dismount without
=any one to assist her=, and in this case she should ride up to a
horse-block so as to bring the left side of her horse close to it, let
the curb reins fall upon his neck, retaining, however, the whip and
snaffle-reins in her left hand, and then, removing her foot from the
stirrup and her right leg from the pommel, she should seat herself a
little sideways upon the saddle. Now, with a slight turn of her
shoulders to the right, she should place her left hand--still holding
the whip and reins--upon the second pommel, and her right hand upon the
off one, and thus alight sideways with her face toward the horse's head.
In effecting this manoeuvre, she must be careful to retain her hold upon
the snaffle-reins and also upon the second pommel until she is safe upon
the horse-block; she must also remember the caution given before, in
regard to having her skirts free from the pommels.

To =dismount upon the ground=, or upon a very low horse-block, =without=
assistance, is a difficult feat to execute gracefully, but some young
ladies in the country, who are active and light, accomplish it so easily
and quickly that they do not appear awkward. The manner in which this is
to be done is nearly the same as that just explained, the only
difference being, that the gliding down must be effected quickly and
lightly, and the rider, as she passes down, must release her hold upon
the off-pommel, but retain that upon the second, also taking care to
have the reins quite loose. This mode of alighting is, however, entirely
out of place except in the country, where assistance cannot always be
had readily, or in cases where the lady is obliged to dismount very
quickly.

If the lady rider, after carefully studying these different methods of
mounting and dismounting with assistance, will select the one she thinks
suits her best, and then practice it a few times with her gentleman
escort, she will soon find herself able to perform with ease these
apparently difficult feats, and will have no need of resorting to a
horse-block, nor to some secluded spot, where she can mount or dismount
unobserved. A lady once told the author that the pleasure of her daily
ride was at one time almost spoiled by the knowledge that she must mount
and dismount in front of a hotel, the piazza of which was always crowded
with observers, for, not having been properly taught to execute these
manoeuvres, she was rather awkward at them. She, however, placed herself
under correct tuition, and soon overcame the difficulty. She can now
execute these movements with such grace and elegance as to fascinate
gentlemen, and excite the envy of rival belles who are still obliged to
seek the aid of a horse-block.




CHAPTER V.

THE SEAT ON HORSEBACK.

    "Bounded the fiery steed in air,
    The rider sat erect and fair,
    Then like a bolt from steel cross-bow
    Forth launched, along the plain they go."

                          _Lady of the Lake._


A correct seat is very seldom attained by the self-taught lady rider,
for her attitude on the horse is so artificial that she cannot, like the
gentleman rider, whose seat is more easy and natural, fall directly into
the proper position. Competent instruction alone can enable her to gain
the safe and easy posture which will give the least possible fatigue to
herself and to her horse. It is true that a natural rider, or she who
professes to ride instinctively, may to-day accidentally assume the
proper position in the saddle, but, as she has no rule by which to guide
herself, and is entirely unacquainted with the "whys and wherefores" of
a correct seat, she will to-morrow assume the incorrect position, so
natural to a self-taught rider, and the pleasant ride of to-day will be
followed by a rough and unpleasant one to-morrow. On the one occasion,
the poor horse will receive much praise for his easy motion, and on the
next be highly censured for the roughness of his gait, for the lady will
not suspect that the real difficulty lies in her own ignorance of a
correct attitude, and in her bad management of the poor beast.

Upon the position of the upper part of the body depends not only grace
and pliancy, and that harmony between horse and rider which is so highly
desirable and, indeed, necessary, but also the ability to manage the
reins properly; for, if the rider be not well balanced, her hands will
be unsteady, and seldom in the right position for controlling the
animal.

But the proper position of the body above the saddle depends upon the
correct arrangement of the lower limbs; if they are not in the right
position, the rider will lean too far forward, or too far back, or too
much to one side or the other. She will also lose all firmness of seat,
and, consequently, all safety in riding. This faulty position of the
lower limbs has been, and still is, the occasion of much incorrect
riding, but is a point which is seldom regarded by the gentleman
teacher. He, indeed, cannot possibly know how the legs are arranged,
when they are covered by the riding skirt, and probably seldom gives
the subject any thought; yet he wonders, after carefully watching and
correcting the position of the body, why his pupil does not retain the
erect position as directed. A lady teacher of experience is, therefore,
much to be preferred to a gentleman, unless the lady pupil is willing to
wear, while taking her lessons, trousers similar to those worn during
calisthenic exercises.

It sometimes happens that a lady, even after being carefully instructed
how to sit in the saddle, and when she seems to understand what is
necessary, will yet present a very erect but stiff appearance, as if she
were made of cast-iron, or some other unyielding material. This may be
due to nervousness, fear, tight-lacing, or affectation. Practice in
riding, loose corsets, and less affectation, will soon remedy this
stiffness.

Another faulty position is one which may be termed "the dead weight
seat," which is only possible when riding on an English saddle. It
consists in sitting or bearing chiefly upon the left side of the saddle,
the right leg firmly grasping the second pommel, and the left leg
squeezed tightly between the stirrup and the third pommel, as if held in
a vise. In this position the rider will be fastened to her horse as
closely as if she were a package of merchandise strapped upon the back
of a pack-horse. She will appear indolent and inanimate, besides riding
heavily, and thus distressing and discouraging her horse; for a
well-trained horse will always prefer to keep in unison with the
movements of his rider, but will find it impossible to do so, when she
adopts this constrained, unyielding seat. The rider will also be made
miserable, for the constant effort to keep steady by a continuous
pressure of the left knee against the third pommel will not only prove
wearisome, but will be apt to bruise her knee, as well as strain the
muscles of the upper part of the leg, and the next day she will feel
very stiff and lame. In addition to which it will be impossible for her
to rise in the English trot, or to move her body to the right in the
gallop or canter when the horse leads with his left leg. Moreover,
should the lady who thus hangs upon the pommel be rather heavy, her
horse's back will be sure to receive more or less injury, no matter how
well the saddle may be made and padded.

Although the second pommel should be firmly grasped by the right knee,
and the left knee be strongly pressed up against the third one, when the
horse is unruly or trying to unseat his rider, these supports should not
be habitually employed, but kept for critical situations, and even then
the body must be kept erect, yet flexible. A rider who depends entirely
upon the pommels to enable her to keep her seat is a bad rider, who will
soon acquire all kinds of awkward and ridiculous positions, and expose
herself to much severe criticism.

The opposite of the "dead-weight seat" is what may be termed the
"wabbling seat." This is seen where the old-fashioned saddle is used;
the rider, instead of sitting firm and erect, bounds up and down like a
rubber ball tossed by an unseen hand. This can be remedied by the
substitution of the English saddle, whose third pommel, when used
judiciously and aided by a proper balance of the body, will give the
required firmness of seat, which should be neither too rigid nor too
yielding.

[Illustration: Fig. 19.--Correct Seat for a Lady. Back View.]

=The correct seat=, universally adopted by finished riders, is the
following: The lady should seat herself exactly on the centre of the
saddle, with her body erect, and her backbone in a direct line with that
of the horse, at a right angle with it. A spectator can readily tell
whether the rider is in the centre of the saddle by observing whether
the space between the buttons on the hind flaps of her riding-jacket
corresponds with the backbone of the horse, and also with the chamber of
the saddle. (Fig. 19.) Or the lady can herself decide the question by
placing her fingers between these two buttons, and then carrying the
former in a straight line directly down to the chamber of the saddle; if
these coincide, and if she has placed herself far enough back on the
saddle to be able to grasp the second pommel comfortably with her right
knee, while the left one is just spanned by the third pommel, then she
is in a position to ride with ease to herself and horse, for she now
sits upon that part of the animal which is the centre of motion in his
forward movement, and in this position can keep in unison with the
cadence of his various gaits. Again, her weight being exactly upon the
centre of motion, she can with difficulty be unseated or shaken off by
the most violent efforts of the horse, for, whether he springs suddenly
forward, or sideways, or whirls around, the rider is in a position at
once to anticipate his movement, to keep a firm seat, and quickly to
gain her balance.

When the horse advances straight forward, the rider--sitting with head
erect and her body so placed that its entire front is directed toward
the horse's head, or, in other words, that _a straight line drawn from
one hip to the other would form a right angle with one drawn along the
centre of the horse's head and neck_--must throw her shoulders somewhat
back, so as to expand her chest, taking care, however, to keep the
shoulders in line, and not to elevate one more than the other. There
should also be, at the back of the waist, a slight inward bend which
will throw the front of the waist a little forward. The arms, from the
shoulders to the elbows, must hang perpendicularly, and the elbows be
held loosely but steadily and in an easy manner, near the rider's sides,
and not be allowed to flap up and down with every movement. The hands
must be held low and about three or four inches from the body. The
bearing of the head, the backward throw of the shoulders, and the curve
at the waist, are exactly like those assumed by a finished waltzer, and
if the reader is herself a dancer, or will notice the carriage of a good
dancer gliding around the ball-room, she can readily understand the
attitude required for a correct seat in the saddle.

The right knee should grasp the second pommel firmly, but not hang upon
it in order to help the rider keep her seat and balance. The right leg,
from the hip to the knee, must be kept as steady as possible, because
from a woman's position in the saddle, the movements of her horse tend
to throw her toward his left side, and she must guard against this by
bearing slightly toward his right. From the knee to the foot, the right
leg must be in contact with the fore-flap of the saddle, the heel being
inclined backward a little.

The left knee should be placed just below the third pommel, so that this
will span it lightly, close enough to assist in preserving a firm seat,
yet not so close as to interfere with the action of the leg in the
English trot. From the knee to the foot this left leg must be held in a
straight line perpendicular to the ground, and the knee be lightly
pressed against the side-flap of the saddle. The ball of the foot must
be placed evenly in the stirrup, the heel being a little lower than the
toes, which should be pointed toward the shoulder of the horse. (Fig.
20.)

[Illustration: Fig. 20.--Correct seat for a lady. Side view.

1, third pommel; 2, second pommel.]

If the rider will seat herself in the saddle in the manner just
described, she will find that she has a very firm seat, from which she
cannot easily be displaced; but in order to appear graceful she must be
flexible, and adapt herself readily to the motions of her horse. The
shoulders, for example, although thrown back, must not be rigid, and the
body, while erect, must be supple; the head be upright and free, and, in
the leap, or when circling in the gallop, the body must be pliant,
yielding and bending with the movements of the horse, but always
resuming afterward the easy erect position. But it must be borne in mind
that the above directions in regard to carriage apply to the times when
the horse is moving, and need not be observed in full rigor at other
times. When, for instance, the horse is standing, the rider may assume a
more easy posture, collecting herself and steed simultaneously when she
wishes him to move.

The novice in riding should never be allowed to touch rein or whip until
she has acquired a good seat, and a correct balance. During her first
lessons, some one should ride by her side and lead her horse, while she,
folding her hands in front of her waist, should give all her attention
to gaining a correct seat; or, she may practice circling to the right by
means of the lunge line, which will prove excellent training, and will
teach her to bear toward the off or right side, for it has already been
stated that the motion in the side-saddle has a tendency to impel the
rider toward the left, and this tendency must always be guarded against
by bearing the body a little to the right. Circling to the right, when
riding in the track of the riding-school, is also a useful exercise for
this purpose, but as riding-schools are not always to be had
conveniently, the lunge line will be found very useful, many riders,
indeed, considering it even better than riding in the ring, as it keeps
the horse well up to his gait.

During a few of the first lessons, that the rider may not fall from the
saddle, the stirrup-leather may be somewhat shortened, but as soon as an
idea of the proper balance has been acquired and the reins and whip are
placed in her hands, the stirrup must be lengthened, as this secures a
firmer and more easy seat. This leather will be of the correct length
when, by a little pressure on it with her foot, and a simultaneous
straightening of her knee, the rider can spring upward about four or
five inches from the saddle; but it must never be so long as to render
the third pommel nearly, if not quite, useless.

It is better to have the first lessons in riding rather short, so that
the pupil may become gradually accustomed to the exercise. As soon as
she begins to feel at all fatigued, she should at once dismount, and not
try to ride again until the tired feeling is wholly gone. These
intervals of fatigue will gradually become less and less frequent, until
at last the rider will find herself so strong and vigorous that riding
will no longer require any fatiguing effort. In the case of an active,
healthy woman, accustomed to exercise of various kinds, these short
preliminary lessons may not be necessary; her muscles will be already so
well developed that she will not be easily fatigued by exercise of any
kind. But for a lady who has always been physically inactive, these
short lessons at first are absolutely necessary. The general system of
such a person has become enfeebled, her muscles are weak and flabby, and
any sudden or long continued exercise would tend to produce very
injurious results, so that riding, unless begun very gradually, would
probably do her more harm than good.

But after reading all the directions just given about riding, the reader
may ask what need there is of so much study and circumspection to enable
a woman to mount a horse and ride him, when hundreds of ladies ride
every day, and enjoy doing so, without knowing anything about the make
of the saddle, or the position they ought to take when seated in it.

Although it seems almost a pity to disturb the serenity and
self-complacency of ignorance, we shall be obliged, in justice to those
who really wish to understand the principles of good horsewomanship, to
point out some of the mistakes of those who think that riding is an
accomplishment which can be acquired without instruction and study.

It is not too sweeping an assertion to state that, of one hundred ladies
who attempt a display of what they consider their _excellent_
horsewomanship in our streets and parks, ninety-five are very imperfect
riders; and the five who do ride well have only learned to do so by
means of careful study and competent instruction. They have fully
appreciated the fact that nature never ushered them into the world
finished riders, any more than accomplished grammarians or Latin
scholars, and that although one may possess a natural aptitude for an
accomplishment, application, study, and practice are positively
necessary to enable her to attain any degree of perfection in it. Yet
the idea unfortunately prevails very largely in this country that women
require very little instruction to become good riders, and the results
of this belief are apparent in the ninety-five faulty riders already
referred to.

Let us now watch some of the fair Americans whom the first balmy day of
spring has tempted out for a horseback ride, and notice the faulty
positions in which they have contrived to seat themselves in their
saddles. With regard to their beauty, elegance of form, and style of
dress, nothing more could be desired; but, alas! the same cannot be said
of their manner of riding.

[Illustration: Fig. 21.--Crooked Position in Saddle. Miss X.]

Take Miss X. and Mrs. Y., for examples. These ladies have the reputation
of being fine and fearless horsewomen, and certainly do ride with that
dash and confidence which long practice in the saddle is sure to give,
but we regret to say that we can bestow no further praise upon them.
Miss X. has taken a position that is almost universal with American
horsewomen, and is exactly the one which a rider nearly always assumes
when seated sideways on a horse without a saddle. Instead of sitting
squarely, with the entire front of her body facing in the direction
toward which the horse is going, she sits crosswise. It will be seen by
looking at Fig. 21, that the central vertical line of her back, instead
of being directly in the centre of the saddle, is placed toward the
right corner of it, and that her shoulders are out of line, the left one
being thrown back, and the right one advanced forward. This position
makes it impossible for her to keep in unison with her horse when he is
moving straight forward at an easy pace. When he changes his gait to a
canter the rider will, for a short distance, appear to be more in
harmony with him, because he is now turning himself slightly to the left
and leading with his right fore-leg, a position which is more in unison
with that of his rider. But, after a short time, the horse gets tired of
this canter, turns to the right, and leads with his left fore-leg. This
change entirely destroys the apparent harmony which had before existed
between the two.

The lady, knowing nothing about the position of a horse when galloping
or cantering, is ignorant of the fact that he always turns a little to
the right or left according to the leg with which he leads, and that she
ought to place her body in a corresponding position. She has but one
position in the saddle,--the crooked one already described,--and this
she maintains immovably through all the changes of her horse's gaits.

[Illustration: Fig. 22.--Crooked Position in Saddle. Mrs. Y.]

Let us now turn to Mrs. Y., who is even a more faulty rider than her
companion. She has likewise taken a crosswise position in the saddle;
but having given a peculiar twist to her body so that, by turning her
right shoulder backward, she can look to the right, she seems to imagine
that by these means she has placed herself squarely upon the saddle.
(Fig. 22.) As she is riding a racking horse and seated on a two-pommeled
saddle, she holds the reins firmly in her left hand and by a steady pull
on them she balances herself and keeps her horse up to his gait. But
this steady pull will soon ruin the tenderness and sensitiveness of any
horse's mouth, and this is the reason why racking horses generally have
very hard mouths, many of them requiring to be well held up or supported
in their rack by the reins. As this pulling upon the reins also gives
considerable support to the rider, many ladies prefer a racking horse.
Now notice Mrs. Y., who is attempting to turn her hard-mouthed
racker. Instead of doing this by an almost imperceptible movement of the
hand, her left hand and arm can be distinctly seen to move, and to
fairly pull the animal around. Her right hand--probably acting in
sympathy with the left, so tightly clasped over the reins--holds the
whip as if it were in a vise intended to crush it. In odd contrast with
the rigidly held hands is the body with its utter lack of firmness.

It can be seen at a glance why the lady will only ride an easy racker,
for it is well known that on a good racker or pacer the body of a rider
in a faulty position is not jolted so much as in other gaits. For this
reason also the rack and pace are the favorite gaits of most American
horsewomen.

Nearly every lady who rides has an ambition to be considered a finished
horsewoman, but this she can never be until she is able to ride properly
the trot and gallop, can keep herself in unison with her horse, whether
he leads with the left or right fore-leg, and has hands that will "give
and take" with the horse's movements and bring him up to his best gait.
From this point of view, Miss X. and Mrs. Y., then, are by no means the
"splendid riders" that their friends suppose them, but having all the
confidence of ignorance they ride fast and boldly and with a certain
_abandon_ that is pleasing; but by those who understand what good riding
is, they must always be regarded as very faulty riders.

[Illustration: Fig. 23.--Incorrect position of legs and feet. Side
view.]

Another common fault, against which we have already warned the reader,
is that of riding with too short a stirrup-leather, thus pressing the
left knee up against the third pommel, carrying the left heel backward
and slightly upward, and dropping the toes of the left foot more or
less down toward the ground, while those of the right are raised and
pointed toward the horse's head. (Fig. 23.) Although the lower limbs are
concealed by the skirt, it can easily be told whether they are in the
position just described, from the effect produced upon the upper part of
the body, which then leans too far forward and too much to the right
(Fig. 24); while the rider, in her efforts to balance herself, inclines
her shoulders to the left. This is a very awkward as well as a very
dangerous attitude, because, by thrusting her leg backwards, the action
of spurring is imitated, and, if the horse is very high-spirited, this
may cause him to become restive, or even to run away. Should the leg,
moreover, as is very apt to be the case, be firmly and steadily pressed
against the animal's side, he may suddenly pirouette or turn around to
the right, especially if he has been accustomed to carrying gentlemen as
well as ladies. This short stirrup-leather and improper use of the third
pommel should be carefully avoided.

[Illustration: Fig. 24.--Incorrect Position when Legs and Feet are
wrongly placed.]

The use of too long a stirrup-leather is apt to be the mistake of those
who ride upon the old-fashioned saddle, but is a fault which has become
much less common since the English saddle has been more generally used.
The objection to too long a stirrup-leather is that, when the foot is
pressed upon it, the leg at the same time is straightened, and extends
down so far as to cause the rider to sit too much to the left of the
saddle. As the pressure and weight are thus thrown wholly upon the left
side, the saddle is very likely to turn, and if this faulty position be
persisted in, it will be certain to injure the horse's back and may give
rise to fistulous withers.

Besides looking very awkward and inelegant, when stooping forward in the
saddle and rounding the back without the slightest curve inwardly, the
rider will also run great risk, if her horse stumbles or makes any
sudden movement, of being unseated, or at least thrown violently against
the front of the saddle, as it is almost impossible for her, under such
circumstances, to adapt herself to the change in his motion quickly
enough to preserve her equilibrium. In all violent movements of the
horse, except rearing, the body must be inclined backward, so as to keep
the balance. When he is moving briskly in his ordinary gaits, the body
must be kept erect; and when he is turning a corner rapidly, it should
be inclined backward somewhat, and toward the inner bend of the horse's
body; or, in other words, toward the centre of the circle, of which the
turn forms a segment.

Here come two ladies who have evidently received very limited
instructions in the art of riding. Notice how the head of one is thrust
forward, while the other, though holding her head erect allows it to be
jerked about with every motion of her horse. It shakes slowly when the
animal is walking, but as he quickens his pace to a canter, it rocks
with his motion, and, during his fast pace, the poor head moves so
rapidly as to make one fear that the neck may become dislocated, while
the arms dance about simultaneously with the movements of the head in a
way that reminds one of the toy dancing-jacks, pulled by an unseen hand
for the amusement of children. The head should, in riding, be kept firm
and erect, without stiffness, the chin being drawn in slightly, and not
protruding high in the air, because the latter gives one a supercilious
look. The head and shoulders should adapt themselves, in their
direction, to the movements of the head and fore-legs of the horse, and
the arms should be held as steady as possible.

But here come several ladies who have taken lessons at the riding-school
and may, therefore, reasonably be expected to be finished riders; but
such, alas! is not the case. They have been trying "to walk before they
could creep," or, in other words, their lessons in riding have been
conducted too hastily. They have begun to try a canter or a rapid gallop
before they knew how to sit correctly upon their horses, or even to
manage them properly in a walk. This desire to make too rapid progress
is more frequently the fault of the pupil than of the riding teacher.
Most teachers have an ambition to make finished riders of their pupils,
and take much pride in doing so, especially as such a result adds
greatly to the prestige of their school. This ambition is often
defeated, however, by the impatience of the pupils, who are not
satisfied to learn slowly and well, but overrule the teacher's
objections and undertake to gallop before they have acquired even the
first principles of horsewomanship. Moreover, many of these ladies never
take any road lessons, so highly important to all who would become
thoroughly accomplished in this art; nor do they remain long enough
under instruction in the school, but seem to think that a few short
lessons are enough to make them finished riders. They often refuse to
learn the English trot, although this is a very important accomplishment
for the beginner, as it enables her to gain a correct idea of the
balance. Or, if they do attempt to learn it, they insist upon circling
only to the right, as this is easier than going the other way.

Again, many pupils will insist upon riding the same favorite horse,
instead of leaving the selection to the judgment of the teacher, who is
well aware that it is much better for the lady's progress that she
should ride a variety of horses with different gaits. He is often driven
to his wit's end when two or three ladies who patronize his school, and
whom it is an honor to have as pupils, express a desire to ride the same
horse on the same occasion. Should he favor one more than the others,
the latter will become highly offended, and the poor man in his
perplexity is often obliged to resort to some subterfuge to pacify them.

It is not difficult, then, to understand why some ladies, although they
have taken lessons at a riding-school, are, nevertheless, not finished
riders, their faults being due, not to the instruction but to their own
lack of judgment or inattention. It is true that occasionally the
teacher, although he may be an excellent instructor for gentlemen, is
not so good a one for ladies, or he may become careless, believing that
if he gives them well-trained horses to ride very little else is
required of him. Or, again, he may think, as many foreigners do, that
very few American ladies know how a woman should ride, and are satisfied
with being half taught.

It cannot be too strongly impressed upon riding teachers that in every
riding-school where ladies are to be taught there should be at least one
lady assistant. A gentleman can give all the necessary instructions
about the management of the horse and the handling of the reins better
than most ladies; but, in giving the idea of a correct seat and the
proper disposal of the limbs, the presence of a lady assistant becomes
necessary; in these matters she can instruct her own sex much better
than a man can.




CHAPTER VI.

TO HOLD THE REINS, AND MANAGE THE HORSE.

    "What a wild thought of triumph, that this girlish hand
    Such a steed in the might of his strength may command!
    What a glorious creature! Ah! glance at him now,
    As I check him awhile on this green hillock's brow;
    How he tosses his mane, with a shrill, joyous neigh,
    And paws the firm earth in his proud, stately play!"

                                       GRACE GREENWOOD.


The position of the rider in the saddle has a decided influence upon the
horse's mouth, rendering his movements regular or irregular, according
to the correctness and firmness of the seat; for, if the rider be
unsteady or vacillating in the saddle, this will exert an influence upon
the hand, rendering it correspondingly unstable, and will thereby cause
the horse's movements to be variable. And should she endeavor to remedy
this unsteadiness of hand and seat by supporting herself upon the reins,
the horse will defend himself against such rigid traction by making
counter-traction upon the reins, thrusting his head forward, throwing
himself heavily upon his fore-legs, thus forcing the hands of the rider,
and compelling her to support the weight of his neck and shoulders. On
the contrary, if she be firm in her seat, and not in the least dependent
upon the reins, her hand will be light, and the animal will yield a
ready obedience and advance in his best pace. The preceding remarks
explain why a horse will go lightly with one rider and heavily with
another.

A lady should have a thorough knowledge of the management of her horse,
and of the means by which she may command him in every degree of speed,
and under all circumstances; without this knowledge she can never become
a safe and accomplished horsewoman. A gentleman may guide and control
his horse, and obtain obedience from a restive one, by a firm, strong
hand, and by his courage and determined will; but as a rule, a lady
cannot depend upon these methods; she will have to rely entirely upon
the thorough training of her horse, a properly arranged bit, her firm,
yet delicate touch, and her skill in handling the reins. The
well-trained hand of a woman is always energetic enough to obtain the
mastery of her horse, without having to resort to feats of strength and
acrobatic movements; and a _lady_ should never seek to gain prestige by
riding restless or vicious horses, in order that she may display her
skill in conquering them; though every rider should be thoroughly
taught how to control her steed in cases of emergency.

When one sees how little skill most lady riders exhibit in managing the
reins, it seems almost miraculous that so few accidents occur to them,
and is indeed a positive proof of the excellent temper of their horses.
From some mysterious cause, most horses will bear more awkwardness and
absurdity in the handling of the reins by a woman than by a man, and
will good-naturedly submit to the indifferent riding of the gentle being
in the side-saddle, while the same character of riding and treatment
from a man would arouse every feeling of defense and rebellion. The
probable cause of this difference of action on the part of the horse is,
that a lady rider, with all her ignorance of seat and rein, will talk
kindly to and pet her steed, and will rarely lose her temper, no matter
in what eccentricities he may indulge, and her gentleness causes the
animal to remain gentle.

On the contrary, when a man throws his weight upon the reins, jerking
and pulling upon them, his horse, seeking to defend himself against such
rough measures, arouses the temper of his rider, and this anger is soon
communicated to the animal, which then becomes obstinate and
rebellious; moreover, a man will often whip and spur for some trivial
offense in instances where a woman would simply speak to her horse, or
take no notice. Hence, the ignorant horsewoman often rides in safety
under circumstances in which the ignorant horseman, who has resorted to
violent measures, meets with an accident.

Although a horse may submit to an awkward rider and carry her with
safety, still she will have no power to make him move in his best and
most regular manner, and there will exist no intelligence or harmony
between the two. Yet this same horse, when mounted by a lady who
understands the =management of the reins=, will be all animation and
happiness. There will soon be established a tacit understanding between
the two, and the graceful curvetings and prancings of the steed will
manifest his pride and joy in carrying and obeying a gentle woman, who
manages the reins with spirit and resolution, and yet does not, with the
cruelty of ignorance or indifference, convert them into instruments of
torture.

The =reins= should not be employed until a firm, steady position upon
the saddle has been acquired, and then, for first lessons, the snaffle
only should be used, =a rein in each hand=. It will be better to have
the reins marked at equal distances from the bit, either by sewing
colored thread across each, or otherwise; this will be useful because,
with the novice, the reins will imperceptibly slip through her hands, or
one rein will become longer than the other, and the markings will enable
her to notice these displacements, and promptly to remedy them. By
holding the snaffle-reins separately, in first lessons, the pupil will
be aided in assuming a square position upon the saddle, and will
likewise be prevented from throwing back her right shoulder, out of line
with the left, a common fault with beginners, especially when the reins
are held only in the left hand. This rein-hold is very simple; the right
rein of the snaffle must be held in the right hand, and the left rein in
the left.

[Illustration: Fig. 25.--Snaffle-reins; one in each hand.]

The hands being closed, but not too tightly, must be held with their
backs toward the horse's head, and each rein, as it ascends from the
bit, must be passed between the third and fourth fingers of its
appropriate hand, carried across the inner surface of the third, second,
and first fingers, and then be drawn over the outside (or side next to
the thumb) of the first finger, against which it must be held by firm
pressure of the thumb. The thumbs must be held opposite each other and
uppermost, the finger-nails toward the body, and the back of the wrists
must be rounded a little outwardly, so as to make a slight bend of the
closed hand toward the body. The little fingers must be held down and
nearly in a horizontal line with the tips of the elbows; and the hands
be kept as low as possible, without resting upon the knees, and be about
four inches distant from the body, and from four to six inches apart.
(Fig. 25.)

This arrangement of hands and reins may be termed the "original
position" when a snaffle-rein is held in each hand, of which all the
others are variations. In this position,--the reins being held just
short enough to feel the horse's mouth,--if the hands be now slightly
relaxed by turning the nails and thumbs toward the body, the latter
being, at the same time, inclined a little forward, the horse will be
enabled to advance freely, and, as soon as he =moves onward=, the
original position of the hands must be gently resumed. It is proper to
remark here, that when using the snaffle-reins only, the curb-bit should
always be in the horse's mouth, its reins being tied and allowed to rest
upon his neck, although the pupil must not be allowed to meddle with it.
The presence of the curb in the horse's mouth, although not used, has a
restraining influence, especially with an animal accustomed to it.

=To turn the horse to the right=, the right rein must be shortened so as
to be felt at the right side of his mouth; to effect this, the little
finger of the right hand must, by a turn of the wrist, be moved in
toward the body and sufficiently toward the left, with the nails up and
the knuckles down, while, in order to aid the horse, the rider will
simultaneously turn her face and shoulders slightly to the right. The
animal having made the turn, the hand must gently return to the original
position, and the body again face to the front.

=To turn the horse to the left=, the left rein must be shortened, by a
turn of the left wrist, carrying the little finger of the left hand
toward the body and to the right, nails upward, etc., while the pupil
will slightly turn her face and shoulders to the left. The turn having
been effected, the original position must be resumed, the pupil, in all
these cases, taking great care that the markings on her reins are even
and in the correct position.

=To stop the horse=, both reins must be shortened evenly; this must be
accomplished by a turn of both wrists that will bring the little fingers
toward the body with the finger-nails uppermost, the body of the pupil
being, at the same time, slightly inclined backward. Now, by bending the
wrists to a still greater degree, and bringing the hands in closer to
the body, which must be inclined a little forward, and nearly in contact
with each other, thus throwing more strength upon the reins, the horse
will be compelled =to back=. To make him =move on again=, the hands and
body must resume the original position, and the hands must be relaxed,
etc., as stated above.

When the pupil becomes more advanced, and can command her horse, in all
his gaits, with the reins separate, one in each hand, she will then be
prepared for lessons in handling =both reins with the left hand= only,
still employing the snaffle, as her touch may not be delicate enough for
the curb.

[Illustration: Fig. 26.--Snaffle-reins; both in the left hand.]

For this purpose, the reins being held for the time being in the right
hand, the left, having its back toward the horse's head, will seize them
as follows: its little finger must be passed directly between the two
reins, the left rein being on the outer side of this finger and the
right one on its right side, between it and the third finger. This done,
the reins must be drawn up nearly even to the marks upon them,[4] so as
just to feel the animal's mouth, noticing that these marks are nearly on
a line with each other, while that portion of the reins lying within the
hand must be carried across its palm to the index finger, to a point
between its first and second joints, against which point, being placed
evenly with one overlying the other, they are to be firmly held by
pressure of the thumb; the right hand may now quit its hold upon the
reins. (Fig. 26.)

  Footnote 4: It is stated in this paragraph that the _marks on the
  reins_ should be "nearly even," or "nearly on a line with each other,"
  because, in its passage under the little finger, across the hand, and
  on the outside of the right rein, the left one will be shortened so
  that its marking will be about half an inch nearer the bit than that
  of the right one; consequently, in order to make the pressure upon the
  horse's mouth even, the right rein will have to be shortened to the
  extent named.

The reins having been properly placed in the left hand according to the
directions just given, this hand, being closed, but not too tightly,
must be held at a distance of about three inches from the front part of
the waist, with the wrist slightly rounded, the nails toward the body,
the back of the hand toward the horse's head, and the little finger down
and a little nearer the body than the others. The under surface of the
bridle arm and hand, from the tip of the elbow to the first joint of the
little finger, should be held nearly in a horizontal line. The elbow
must be held somewhat close to the side but not in contact with it, and
should be kept steady. Care must be taken, when the reins are held in
the left hand, that the right shoulder be not thrown back, nor the left
one elevated, faulty positions common to beginners when not otherwise
instructed. The right arm should be allowed to hang easily and steadily
at the side, the whip being lightly held in it, with its point downward.
When the snaffle-reins are held in the left hand as described, we may
term this the "original position," of which all the others are
variations.

In order that the horse may =move onward=, the left hand, holding the
reins as just described, should be relaxed by turning the thumb downward
and toward the body until the back of the hand is up and the
finger-nails down; at the same time, the pupil should slightly incline
her body forward, being careful not to round the shoulders,--aiding the
movement by the voice, or, if necessary, by a gentle tap of the whip.
The horse having started onward, the original position must be gently
resumed.

In order to =turn the horse to the right=, the left wrist must be turned
so as to bring the nails down and the knuckles up,--the thumb being
toward the body,--at the same time carrying the little finger slightly
to the left, and drawing the reins a little upward. This movement will
effect the necessary shortening of the right rein, without allowing any
looseness of the left one. The turn having been accomplished, the hand
must resume the original position. It must not be forgotten, that while
making this turn the face and shoulders must be turned somewhat to the
right, or in the direction in which the horse is moving.

=To turn to the left=, the bridle-hand being in the original position,
its wrist must be turned so as to carry the finger-nails up, and the
knuckles down, simultaneously moving the little finger toward the right
and pressing it against the left rein, both reins being drawn slightly
upward. This manoeuvre shortens the left rein, without relaxing the
right. In this turn the movements of the horse should be aided by the
rider's face and shoulders being turned a little to the left. The turn
having been made, the original position must be resumed.

The horse =may be stopped= by simply turning the wrist so as to carry
the finger-nails up, the knuckles down, and the little finger toward the
body, which must be slightly inclined backward. Now, by bracing the
muscles of the hand, bending the wrist and carrying the hand farther in
toward the waist, at the same time advancing the body, the animal will
be made =to back=; though, in backing a horse, it will be better to
employ both hands. After having stopped, or backed the horse, to make
him =move onward=, a course should be pursued, with both reins in the
bridle-hand, similar to that described for the same purpose when a rein
is held in each hand.

=To change the snaffle-reins from the left to the right hand=, as is
sometimes necessary in order to adjust the skirt, to relieve the left
hand, etc., the following course must be pursued, whether the horse be
in rapid or slow motion: While the left hand must retain its position
and gentle pressure of the reins upon the horse's mouth, the right must
be carried to and over the left hand, its forefinger be passed between
the two reins, so that the left rein will be on the left side of this
finger, and the right on its right side, between the first and second
fingers; both reins must now be carried to the right, across the palm,
to the little finger; the hand must then be firmly closed, and the thumb
be pressed against the left rein, holding it in contact with the index
finger,--the left hand now gives up the reins. In this change, while the
right hand is being carried over to the left, this latter must be held
stationary, as any movement of it to meet the right hand may cause the
animal to turn or swerve from his course, and will at the same time
interfere with his gait.

=To return the reins to the left hand=, the following course must be
pursued: While the right hand must remain steady and sustain the gait of
the horse, the left must be carried to and over it, insert its little
finger between the two reins, so that the left one will be on the left
or outer side of this finger, and the right one on its right side,
between it and the third finger; then the reins must be drawn through
the left hand, and be arranged and held in this hand in the same manner
as explained when describing the original position of both snaffle-reins
in the bridle-hand.

These various changes must be made quickly and expertly, without
altering the degree of pressure or pull upon the horse's mouth. The
novice will find it greatly to her advantage to learn the management of
the reins before mounting the horse, and can do so by fastening the
bit-end of the reins to some stationary object, and then practicing the
different changes, until she can perform all these manoeuvres without
looking at her hands or the reins.

When both the reins are held in the left hand, the rider has not so much
command over her horse as when they are held one in each hand. For this
reason, unless her steed be exceptionally well-trained and obedient, it
will be better, when in a crowded thoroughfare, where quick turns have
to be made, to hold a rein in each hand, and this will become absolutely
necessary if the animal be hard mouthed or unruly.

When the horse is in motion and the reins are held in the left hand,
their =separation= may be quickly effected by carrying the right hand
to and over the left, the latter retaining its steadiness all the time,
and then passing the first three fingers of the right hand between the
two reins, so that they may readily close upon the right rein; the thumb
will then keep this rein firm by pressing it against the first joint of
the index finger. The position of the hands and reins will then, after a
movement of the left little finger to place the rein between it and the
third, be the same as described for the original position where a
snaffle-rein is held in each hand.

Should the reins become too long when held separately, they can readily
=be shortened= by returning the right rein to the bridle-hand, placing
it directly over the left rein between the third and little finger, and
then, by means of the right hand, drawing the loose rein or reins
through the bridle-hand to the proper length, after which the right rein
may again be taken in the right hand, as already described.

When the reins are held in one hand, they can be =shortened or
lengthened= by simply seizing them at their free, disengaged ends with
the right hand, and while this holds them and sustains the horse, the
left hand must be slipped along the reins, up or down, as may be
required, but without changing their arrangement.

Another way of holding the reins in the bridle-hand is to pass the right
rein to the right of, and underneath, the index finger, and then carry
it across the palm, so as to escape beyond the little finger; while the
left rein must be passed to the left of the little finger (or between it
and the third finger), and then be carried across the palm to escape
beyond the index finger. The author cannot recommend this manner of
holding the reins to ladies who desire to become accomplished and
graceful riders, because the movements of the hands and arms, when
turning, or managing the horse, are much more conspicuous; and there is
not that delicate correspondence with the animal's mouth that can be
obtained by the other methods described.

After the pupil has become expert in riding with the snaffle, she will
be ready for the =double bridle=, or the =curb-bit and bridoon=. The
double bridle must be =held in the left hand= in the following manner:
The _bridoon_ or _snaffle-reins_ are first to be taken up, evenly, by
the right hand and then the second finger of the left hand be passed
between these reins (the left rein being between the second and third
fingers, and the right rein between the first and second), the back of
the hand being directed somewhat upward, with the knuckles toward the
horse's head; the reins should then be pulled up by the right hand just
enough to feel the horse's mouth, and carried across the palm to the
index finger, where they should be held in position by firm pressure
with the thumb.

[Illustration: Fig. 27.--Double bridle: all reins in the bridle-hand.

1, upper reins, snaffle; 2, lower reins, curb.]

The _curb-reins_ are now to be taken evenly by the right hand, and then
the little finger of the left hand be passed between the two reins, the
left rein being upon the left or outer side of the little finger, and
the right rein between the little and third fingers; both curb-reins
should next be drawn upward by the right hand until they are nearly the
length of the snaffle, and carried across the palm, one rein overlying
the other, to the index finger, between its first and second joints, and
between the snaffle-reins and the thumb, at which point all the reins
must be firmly held by pressure of the thumb against them; the right
hand will now remove its hold. (Fig. 27.) The above manoeuvring of the
reins will give the "original position" for the double bridle in the
left hand. All these reins should be of nearly equal length, the snaffle
being slightly the shortest, so that, while riding with the latter, the
curb may be ready for instant use; this may be brought into play by
simply turning the wrist so as to carry the little finger up and toward
the waist. And the full power of the curb may be brought into action by
turning the wrist so as to carry the knuckles down and the nails up, at
the same time drawing the little finger toward the waist.

